Plant Guide 

  

 

Natural Resources Conservation Service  

BARLEY 
Hordeum vulgare L. 
Plant Symbol = HOVU 

 

 

  

Alternate Names 
Common Alternate Names:  common barley, grain 
barley, cereal barley 
Scientific Alternate Names:  Hordeum aegiceras Nees ex 
Royle, Hordeum distichon L., Hordeum hexastichon L., 
Hordeum hexastichum L., Hordeum irregulare Aberg & 
Wiebe, Hordeum sativum Pers., Hordeum vulgare L. 
ssp. hexastichon (L.) Bonnier & Layens, Hordeum 
vulgare L. var. trifurcatum (Schltdl.) Alef. 

Barley crop (USDA-NRCS photo) 

Description 
General: Barley is an annual, cool season bunchgrass that grows 2–4 ft tall (Ball et al., 1996). Stems are hollow and jointed. 
Leaf surfaces and leaf margins are smooth, tapered, and arise on the stem above ground level (Brown, 1979). Nodes and 
internodes of stems are hairless (Radford et al., 1968). Seeds are borne on a spike inflorescence ¾ to 4 inches (2–10 cm) long 
with flower clusters in groups of three long bristles (called awns). Awns can be absent in some varieties, but when present 
can reach 6 inches in length (Radford et al., 1968).  
Prior to flowering, barley can be confused with other small grains. Barley is distinguished from wheat, rye, and oats by 
examining the leaf collar when it is pulled away from the stem. The leaf collar on a barley plant will have two overlapping 
appendages that clasp the stem, called auricles (Ball et al., 1996) 
There are two different groups of barley, the six-rowed and two-rowed types. These groups refer to the differences in the 
arrangement of the seedheads in the spike. When viewing a head of six-rowed barley from above, there are six rows of 
kernels, three on each side of the rachis (seedhead stem). In two-rowed barley, only the middle spikelet develops a kernel, 
and the other two spikelets are sterile. When viewed from above, the two-rowed type appears to have only two kernels 
(Carena et al., 2009).  

 
Traditionally, barley has a husk or hull around the grain that limits digestibility. Hull-less 
varieties have hulls that can easily be removed from the grain when it is combined and 
threshed, and contain more digestible energy (Griffey et al., 2009).  
 
Distribution: Barley is not native to the United States and only exists in cultivated areas. It 
sometimes volunteers in fields and disturbed areas, but is not persistent (Hitchcock and 
Chase, 1971). It can be found in grainfields and along roads from Connecticut to New 
Jersey, South Dakota, Montana, Colorado, Utah, New Mexico, and California. For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Habitat: Barley is an ancient cereal crop that does not exist in the wild. It has been grown 
all around the world, and its precise origin is unknown (Harlan, 1979). Barley may have 
evolved from Hordeum spontaneum, a weedy plant commonly found throughout the fertile 
crescent region of the Near East. However, there is evidence to suggest that Hordeum 
agriocrithon, discovered in 1938 in Tibet, may be a closer ancestor to modern cultivated 

Example of a six-rowed barley 
variety. (Photo by H. 
Bockelman, USDA-NRCS) 
barley (Harlan, 1974). Both of these regions have long histories of farming barley crops.  

Adaptation 
Barley grows well with supplemental irrigation in cool, dry areas. It can be grown in a hot climate, but is more susceptible to 
diseases and pathogens in a hot, humid climate (Weibe, 1979). Barley crops are not typically grown in the humid regions of 
the southeastern United States (Schaffer, 1993). It is more winter-hardy than oats, but is more prone to winterkill than wheat 

 

or rye (Weibe, 1979). Barley is sensitive to winter conditions and will die if the temperature drops below 17°F (Hannaway et 
al., 2004).  
 
Barley cannot tolerate poorly drained soil, grows well when pH values are between 6.0– 8.5 (Midwest Cover Crops Council, 
2012), and has been used to reclaim saline soils (Hannaway et al., 2004). It generally grows better than any other small grain 
in highly alkaline soils (Reid et al., 1979). Best soils for growing barley are well-drained loams and clay loams (Reid et al., 
1979). Growing barley on sandy soils causes uneven plant growth and development (Hannaway et al., 2004).  

Uses 
Cereal grain production: Barley is a cool-season annual grass that produces grain for human and animal consumption. 
Because there are both summer and winter varieties, barley can be grown at a wide variety of locations. It ranks fourth in 
terms of world grain production behind maize (Zea maize L.), wheat (Triticum aestivum L.), and rice (Oryza sativa L.) 
(Carena, 2009). In the United States, barley grain is used primarily as a high-protein additive to livestock feed for cattle, 
sheep, pigs, and poultry. An estimated 25% of barley grain production in the United States is used to make malted beverages 
such as beer (Davidson et al., 2012). This crop is one of the only cereal crops that can withstand high elevations and short 
growing seasons, and is an important food staple for humans in the Andes mountains of Peru and the high plateaus of Tibet 
(Carena, 2009).  
 
Forage: Barley, like other small grain crops, can be grazed by livestock before seedheads are produced. Barley can be 
planted sooner than wheat, and provides early season grazing. It is a valuable annual forage during drought, as it uses water 
more efficiently than other small grains (Schaffer, 1993). Silage yields are generally 2.5 ton/acre of dry matter with 9% crude 
protein and 27% crude fiber (Ball et al., 1998).  
 
Cover crop: Barley is also used as a cover crop, a crop grown specifically to maintain cropland soil quality, fertility, and 
productivity (Magdoff and Van Es, 2009). Cover crops are not harvested and are terminated on the surface or incorporated 
into soil before they mature. Cover crop species limit soil erosion by providing cover to the soil when a commercial crop is 
not growing. 
 
In the United States, barley can be grown farther north than other cereal grains and can produce more biomass than other 
small grain crops in a shorter amount of time (Clark, 2010). Barley is often seeded in mixtures with legumes to boost soil 
nitrogen levels. It can be planted as a winter annual in warmer climates or as a spring annual in cooler climates, but is most 
popular in the Midwest Corn Belt, Northern Plains, Inland Northwest, Northwest Maritime, California Central Valley, and 
Southwest bioregions (Clark, 2010). Seed is usually inexpensive and easy to acquire. Barley as a cover crop provides 
solutions to the specific resource concerns listed below.  
 
Weed control: Barley is a fast-growing annual grass that competes with weeds by shading and absorbing nutrients and water 
from the soil. Barley also discourages weed germination by producing allelopathic chemicals (chemicals that are toxic to 
other plants). An Ohio study found that using barley as a cover crop suppressed yellow foxtail (Setaria glauca) emergence by 
81% (Creamer et al., 1996a).  
 
Soil condition, erosion: Barley cover crops protect soil from erosion, especially when grown as a winter annual in Plant 
Hardiness Zone 8 and warmer (California, western Oregon, and Washington) (Clark, 2010). Roots develop in the fall and can 
reach a vertical depth of 6.5 feet. Barley is planted between rows of berries in Oregon and between the rows of vineyards in 
California to hold the soil.  
 
Excessive nitrate leaching: Grass cover crops have deep roots and are useful for their ability to capture nitrogen by the 
primary crop. Barley absorbs nitrogen and retains it in long-lasting biomass. 
 
Inadequate soil organic matter/soil quality: Barley crops can produce up to 12,900 lb/acre of biomass (Clark, 2010). Leaving 
this biomass on the field to decompose increases the amount of organic matter in the soil. Increasing soil organic matter can 
increase soil aggregate stability, adequate soil drainage, and adequate soil pore space for oxygen, water, and plant roots.  
 
Pest Management: Growing barley as a cover crop in a soybean rotation may improve beneficial fungi associations in 
soybean roots. One study reported that these fungal benefits increased soybean yields when compared to an area grown 
without a cover crop (Shimazaki et al., 2008). Planting a barley crop prior to growing potatoes as part of a rotational crop 
system has also been recommended to reduce soil pathogens that cause rhizoctonia canker, black scurf, and common scab 
(Larkin, 2010). 
 

 

Nurse/companion crop: Barley is commonly planted to protect vegetable crops such as carrots and onions that are vulnerable 
to wind damage. It maintains an upright habit after termination with a herbicide, which protects vegetables more effectively 
than oat nurse crops (Midwest Cover Crops Council, 2012). When seeded in a fall mixture, barley can provide protection to 
fragile red clover or sweet clover seedlings (Reid et al., 1979). It can serve as a companion crop for alfalfa plantings in the 
irrigated western states because it does not persist or compete with the alfalfa after the first growing season (Reid et al., 
1979).  

Air quality: Cotton producers in Arizona have planted barley as a winter cover crop to control blowing dust within PM-10 
(particulate matter that is 10 micrometers or less) active management areas (Munda et al., 1998). Cotton fields on highly 
erodible land (HEL) are usually fallow when wind velocities are highest and precipitation is lowest. Barley cover crops can 
be seeded after cotton crop harvest to hold the soil and limit wind erosion. Munda et al. (1998) reported that a barley crop in 
southern Arizona achieved 90% groundcover on a silty clay textured soil and 65% groundcover on a sandy textured soil with 
minimal irrigation. 
 
Ethnobotany 
Barley has been grown since ancient times to provide dietary starch to human societies. It remains a dietary staple for 
societies where wheat or corn will not grow, such as the Himalayas and Tibet. Barley grown in these regions is usually the 
naked (hull-less) variety because it is easier to grind into flour for breads or porridge (Reid et al., 1979).  
 
Barley was brought to America by two routes. Columbus carried seed on his ships from Haiti to New England and Spanish 
conquerors brought barley to the southwestern region in the 17th century (Wiebe, 1979). Colonists planted barley mainly for 
conversion to malted beverages. Barley is better suited than wheat and rye to malting procedures because the seed has an 
intact hull that protects the seed while it is germinating and being processed (Dickson, 1979). The seed kernel is also firmer 
than other cereals, and can be handled with less damage at high moisture contents typical in the malting process. Malting is 
the second largest use of barley, surpassed only by feed for livestock. Barley cultivars are designated as being either malting 
or feed qualities. Feed quality cultivars do not meet rigorous industry standards for malting.  

Status 
Weedy or Invasive:  
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation if not properly 
managed. Please consult with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service office, state natural resource, or 
state agriculture department regarding its status and use. 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site (http://plants.usda.gov/) and your state’s Department of Natural Resources for this 
plant’s status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Planting Guidelines 
Prepare a clean, weed-free seedbed prior to planting. Deep, fibrous roots will absorb residual nutrients from the soil, so 
fertilization is not typically needed when planted as a cover crop. However, if soil tests indicate nitrogen is needed, apply 
recommended amounts at time of planting (Reid et al., 1979). If barley is planted in an arid climate, a minimum of one 
irrigation event is needed for establishment (Munda et al., 1998).  
 
Seeding dates: Barley can be grown at a wide variety of locations with very different planting dates. Regional seeding dates 
are summarized by Reid et al. (1979).  

Southeastern states: Winter barley is seeded from September to November. It can be seeded along with annual ryegrass 
(Lolium spp.) to provide quality cool-season hay, silage, or grazing pasture. Winter barley for pasture can be planted as early 
as August 15. 

Great Plains region: Spring barley can be planted March through May 1 in order to establish plants before warm summer 
temperatures. Winter varieties can also be planted in late January to February in the southern Great Plains. 

Northeastern states/New England: Spring barley can be planted March to June. 

Great Basin & Pacific Northwest: Spring barley is planted from March 15–April 30, and winter barley is planted from 
September 1–October 15. Spring barley can be sown in the fall, but avoid planting varieties that flower early. These varieties 
may be harmed by late spring frosts.  

 

If growing barley for a grain crop only, consult local cooperative extension information for specific seeding dates and rates 
for your area.  
 
Cover Crop: Plant 50–75 lb/acre pure live seed (PLS) with a conventional grain drill or no-till drill with double disk openers 
at a depth of ¾ –1 ½ inches. Use 50 lb/acre PLS if using a narrow row seed planter (Midwest Cover Crop Council, 2012). 
Plant 80–125  lb/acre PLS if broadcasting, and incorporate seeds with shallow tillage using a field cultivator with harrow 
attachment (Clark, 2010). Barley can also be inter-seeded by planting a higher rate of 60–90 lb/acre PLS for aerial/surface 
seeding, when the primary crop reaches physiological maturity. 
 
There is an average of 13,600 seeds per pound (Midwest Cover Crop Council, 2012). Seed size varies among cultivars, and 
kernels from two-rowed varieties are usually larger than six-rowed varieties. Determine seeds per pound prior to calculating 
seeding rate.  
 
Planting a barley cover crop with a legume species is often recommended to boost soil nitrogen levels. The barley crop serves 
as a nurse crop for legume establishment and provides structural support for climbing legumes such as vetch (Sattell et al., 
1998). Barley cover crop seeding rates should be reduced when planting in a mixture; however, rates are variable and depend 
on which resource concerns are being addressed. For example, Creamer et al. (1996b) planted a cover crop mix of barley, 
hairy vetch (Vicia villosa Roth.), rye (Secale cereale L.), and crimson clover (Trifolium incarnatum L.) to suppress weeds in 
tomato production. Barley was seeded at a rate of 24 lb/acre and composed 7–10% of the seed mix by weight.  

Management 
Management differs according to crop use. In arid areas, irrigation should be applied at boot stage (when seedheads begin to 
form) and after grazing. The most important management consideration when planting barley as a cover crop is ensuring that 
it is terminated at the proper time. Allowing barley to reach full maturity or failing to terminate growth at the proper time 
may inhibit germination and growth of the primary crop. See the Control section for more information. Refer to the USDA 
Risk Management Agency for updated guidelines for cover crop termination dates for different areas in the United States.  
 
If the primary use of the crop is for forage, grazing can be initiated when plants reach 11–15 inches tall (Hannaway et al., 
2004). At crop maturity, seedheads develop elongated, spiky awns that can cause injury to the mouths and eyes of livestock. 
Graze the plants prior to seedhead maturity, or plant awnless/hooded varieties to minimize adverse effects on grazing 
animals. Barley can be cut for hay as soon as seedheads begin to develop (early boot stage) or for silage when seeds begin to 
ripen but are still soft and doughy (dough stage) (Ball et al., 1996). In Oregon, hay can be cut 2–3 times during the fall 
growing season (Hannaway et al., 2004). Barley grown for pasture, hay or silage requires higher fertilizer application than 
crops grown only for grain, since a greater amount of nutrients are removed in plant residue (Reid et al., 1979).  

Pests and Potential Problems 
Residue from mature plants has a very high carbon to nitrogen ratio (meaning that it will break down slowly in the soil). In 
the short term, little or no nitrogen will be released for use by the primary crop (Allison et al., 2000). This may actually 
increase nitrogen fertilization requirements in the first year. Seeding a legume species with a barley cover crop can minimize 
nitrogen deficiencies. Since barley crops produce large amounts of biomass, planting the primary crop can be difficult with 
traditional planting equipment. It is important to terminate growth at the appropriate stage to minimize thatched residue, 
which can prevent primary crop germination by shading out seedlings. See Control/Cover Crop Termination for more 
information. 

Barley is susceptible to various diseases, especially in humid climates. The most serious of these is barley yellow dwarf virus 
(BYDV), which is transmitted by a variety of aphids. This virus is commonly transmitted by the bird cherry-oat aphid and 
greenbug (Moseman, 1979). In the southeastern United States, winter barley crops can be severely damaged by armyworms. 
Barley crops are also susceptible to damage from the Hessian fly and different species of grasshoppers. Many cultivars have 
improved resistance to pests and pathogens, so it is important to use the correct variety for local conditions.  

Environmental Concerns 
There are no known environmental concerns associated with barley.  

Control/Cover Crop Termination 
Since barley exudes allelochemicals that inhibit the germination of other plants, it is important to terminate plants at least 14 
days before planting corn or other crops (Midwest Cover Crops Council, 2012). . Refer to the USDA Risk Management 
Agency for updated guidelines for cover crop termination dates for different areas in the United States. Some studies suggest 
that barley should be terminated more than one month prior to planting corn to allow standing residue to decompose. 
Salmeron et al. (2011) found that terminating a barley cover crop 18–26 days prior to planting caused yield reductions in the 
subsequent irrigated corn crop due to nitrogen deficiency in the soil. Allowing barley to seed out and reach full maturity may 

 

immobilize (tie up) available nitrogen for the primary crop, so barley should be terminated when plants reach a height of 6–8 
inches (Midwest Cover Crops Council, 2012). Methods of termination include applying an effective herbicide. Consult your 
local Agricultural Extension office for specific herbicide recommendations. Other effective termination methods include 
tilling (though tillage may negate the cover crop’s soil building benefits), or mowing when seeds are developing but still soft 
and milky (milk or dough stage). 
 
An alternative way to kill the crop while leaving residue to decompose on the surface involves the use of a roller crimper. A 
roller crimper is a custom piece of equipment designed to kill residue without intense tillage or chemicals (Sayre, 2003). A 
roller crimper attaches to a tractor and crimps the plants with corrugated blades and lays them flat on the surface. No-till 
planters can seed the primary crop directly into the leftover residue. Barley residue on top of the soil provides a mulch that 
limits weed germination and soil erosion, while conserving soil moisture for the primary crop. Clark and Panciera (2002) 
found that terminating a rye (Secale cereale) cover crop using the roller crimper was as effective as an herbicide treatment 
and did not affect subsequent corn yields planted into residue.  
 
To minimize re-sprouting, barley cover crops should be terminated using the roller crimper when the cover crop has flowered 
but not set seed. At least 20% of the crop should be at the soft dough stage to achieve full termination with the roller crimper 
(Sayre, 2003).  
 
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your area and 
how to use it safely. Always read label and safety instructions for each control method. 

Seeds and Plant Production 
Barley seed/grain production occurs in cool, dry areas of the United States. North Dakota is the nation’s leading producer of 
barley seed. Barley is generally planted in North Dakota as a spring crop in April.  

For grain crop establishment, plant higher rates of 120 lb/acre (Ottman, 2004). Seed size varies between cultivar and region 
of production, so it is important to determine seeds per pound before calculating seeding rate. Consult local cooperative 
extension recommendations for commercial barley crop seeding rates. In arid areas, adequate irrigation should be applied for 
establishment. General recommendations include application of 25–40 lb/acre of nitrogen at planting (Alley et al., 2009). It is 
important to calculate fertilizer rates based on soil tests because barley may exhibit lodging (collapse of tillers) when excess 
nitrogen is available. Alley et al. (2009) reported that lodging occurred in barley crops grown in Virginia fields when 
nitrogen application rates reached 100 lb/acre or greater. 

Barley harvest should occur when seed moisture content is between12.5 and 18% (McIntyre, 2010). If moisture content is 
below 11%, the seed is too dry and the seed coat may peel away (Davison, 2012). Harvesting crops with higher moisture 
content requires drying in cool, well-ventilated conditions. Seed is harvested mechanically with a combine and thresher. Seed 
harvested for use in the malting industry must be harvested with care, as cracked or skinned seeds are not acceptable to 
industry standards (McIntyre, 2010). Grains with 10.5% moisture or less can be stored for up to 18 months at 50–68°F, while 
grains with 12.5% moisture and above can only be stored for less than 3 months at 68–86°F to meet quality-malting standards 
(McIntyre, 2010).  

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area of origin) 
There are two types of barley seed stock commonly available: malting and feed varieties. Malting varieties must meet 
rigorous standards for germination quality, kernel size and weight, kernel plumpness, and moisture content. Varieties that do 
not meet malting industry standards are referred to as feed varieties. Almost all malting varieties are spring two-rowed 
barleys (Davison, 2012).  
 
Thousands of barley cultivars have been developed for specific uses. ‘Seco’ is a six-rowed cultivar developed in 1987 for its 
yield and vigor in dryland plantings in Arizona and California (Soil Conservation Service, 1989). Variety should be selected 
based on the local climate, resistance to local pests, and intended use. Consult with land grant university or local extension 
office for recommendations on adapted barley variety for use in your area. 
 
Literature Cited 
Alley, M.M., T.H. Pridgen, D.E. Brann, J.L Hammons, and R.L. Mulford. 2009. Nitrogen fertilization of winter barley: 

principles and recommendations. Virginia Cooperative Extension. Publication 424-801. http://pubs.ext.vt.edu/424/424-
801/424-801.html (accessed 10 Sept. 2012). 

Allison, M.F., M.J. Armstrong, K.W. Jaggard, and A.D. Todd. 1998. Integration of nitrate cover crops into sugarbeet (Beta 

Ball, D.M., C.S. Hoveland, and G.D. Lacefield.1998. Southern forages. 2nd ed. Potash and Phosphate Inst. and Foundation 

vulgaris) rotations. J. Agri. Sci. 130: 53-60.  

for Agronomic Research, Norcross, GA. 

 

Brown, L. 1979. Grasses: an identification guide. Houghton Mifflin Company, New York.  
Carena, M.J. 2009. Handbook of plant breeding: cereals. 1st ed. Springer, New York. 
Clark, A. 2010. Managing cover crops profitably. Third edition. SARE Outreach, College Park, MD. 
Clark, S., and M. Panciera. 2002. Cover crop roll-down for weed suppression in no-till crop production. In: 2012 Fruit and 

vegetable crops research report, Berea College. http://www.ca.uky.edu/agc/pubs/pr/pr470C.HTM#vegetables (accessed 7 
Aug. 2012).  

Creamer, N.G., M.A. Bennett, B.R. Stinner, J. Cardina, and E.E. Regnier. 1996a.  Mechanisms of weed suppression in cover 

crop-based production systems. HortScience 31:410-413. 

Creamer, N.G., M.A. Bennett, B.R. Stinner, J. Cardina. 1996b. A comparison of four processing tomato production systems 

differing in cover crop and chemical inputs. J. Amer. Soc. Hort. Sci. 121 (3): 559-568. 

Davison, J., B. Schultz, and A. Widaman. 2012. Malting barley in Nevada. Univ. of Nevada Cooperative Extension Fact 

Sheet. FS-01-47. Reno. http://www.unce.unr.edu/publications/files/ag/2001/fs0147.pdf (accessed 7 Aug. 2012).  

Dickson, A.D. 1979. Barley for malting and food. In: Barley: origin, botany, culture, winter hardiness, genetics utilization, 

pests. USDA Agriculture Handbook 338. Washington, DC.  

Griffey, C., W. Brooks, M. Kurantz, W. Thomason, F. Taylor, D. Obert.2009. Grain composition of Virginia winter barley 

and implications for use in feed, food, and biofuels production. J. Cereal Science 51:41-49. 

Harlan, J.R. 1979. On the origin of barley. In: Barley: origin, botany, culture, winter hardiness, genetics utilization, pests. 

USDA Agriculture Handbook 338. Washington, DC.  

Hitchcock, A.S., and A. Chase. 1971. Manual of the grasses of the United States. Dover Publ., New York.  
Hannaway, D.B., C. Larson, and D. Myers. 2004. Barley fact sheet. Oregon State Univ. 

http://forages.oregonstate.edu/php/fact_sheet_print_grass.php?SpecID=55(accessed 28 Aug. 2012). 

Larkin, R.P., T.S. Griffin, and C.W. Honeycutt. 2010. Rotation and cover crop effects on soilborne potato diseases, tuber 

yield, and soil microbial communities. Plant Dis. 94:1491-1502.  

Magdoff, F., and H. Van Es. 2009. Building soils for better crops, sustainable soil management. Sustainable Agric. Publ., 

Waldorf, MD. 

McIntyre, K., and D. Lester. 2010. Barley-planting, nutrition, and harvesting. Queensland Dep. of Agric., Fisheries, and 

Forestry. http://www.daff.qld.gov.au/26_3514.htm (accessed 24 Aug. 2012).   

Midwest Cover Crops Council. 2012. Midwest cover crops field guide, ID-433. Purdue Univ., West Lafayette, IN. 
Moseman, J.G. 1979. Insect pests of barley and their control. In: Barley: origin, botany, culture, winter hardiness, genetics 

utilization, pests. USDA Agriculture Handbook 338. Washington, DC.  

Munda, B., T.C. Knowles, and A. Meen. 1998. Winter forage cover crop trials. In: 1998 Forage and grain agriculture report, 
AZ1059. Univ. of Arizona College of Agric., Tucson. http://ag.arizona.edu/pubs/crops/az1059/az105922.htm. (accessed 
9 Sept. 2012).  

Ottman, M. 2004. Seeding rates for small grains in Arizona. Univ. of Arizona Cooperative Extension. 

http://ag.arizona.edu/pubs/crops/az1334/ (accessed 24 Aug. 2012). 

Radford, A.E., H.F. Ahles, and C.R. Bell. 1968. Manual of the vascular flora of the Carolinas. Univ. of North Carolina Press, 

Chapel Hill. 

Reid, D.A., R.G. Shands, and C.A. Suneson. 1979. Culture of barley in the United States. In: Barley: origin, botany, culture, 

winter hardiness, genetics utilization, pests. USDA Agriculture Handbook 338. Washington, DC.  

Salmeron, M., R. Isla, and J. Cavero. 2011. Effect of winter cover crop species and planting methods on maize yield and N 

availability under irrigated Mediterranean conditions. Field Crops Research 123:89-99.  

Sattell, R., R. Dick, R. Karow, D. Kaufman, J. Luna, D. McGrath, and E. Peachy. 1998. Barley, oats, triticale, wheat. In: 

Cover crops in Oregon. EM 8704. Oregon State Univ., Corvallis. 
http://ir.library.oregonstate.edu/xmlui/bitstream/handle/1957/14959/em8692.pdf (accessed 7 Aug. 2012). 

Sayre, L. 2003. New tools for organic no-till. Rodale Institute. 

http://newfarm.rodaleinstitute.org/depts/NFfield_trials/1103/notillroller.shtml (accessed 7 Aug. 2012). 
Schaffer, J.A., E. Palm, and R.E. Munson. 1993. Barley. Univ. of Missouri Extension: G4312. Colombia.  
Shimazaki, Y., T. Uchida, and H. Kobayashi. 2008. Winter barley as a cover crop affects the arbuscular mycorrhizal 

colonization of no-tillage soybeans. Japanese J. of Crop Sci. 77:395-402.  

Soil Conservation Service. 1989. ‘Seco’ barley release brochure. Program aid number 1428. USDA. http://www.plant-

materials.nrcs.usda.gov/pubs/azpmcrbhovuseco.pdf (accessed 8 Aug. 2012).  

Wiebe, G.A. 1979. Introduction of barley into the new world. In: Barley: origin, botany, culture, winter hardiness, genetics 

utilization, pests. USDA Agriculture Handbook 338. Washington, DC. 

 
Citation 
Jacobs, A.A. 2016. Plant guide for common barley (Hordeum vulgare L.). USDA-Natural Resources Conservation Service, 
Jamie L. Whitten Plant Materials Center. Coffeeville, Mississippi. 

Published: November 2016 

 

Edited: 24Oct2012 aym, 10Jan2012 cms, 01Nov2016 erg 

For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation District at 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the  
Plant Materials Program Web site: 
http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability of other Web sites. 
 
 
 

The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination against its customers, employees, and applicants for 
employment on the bases of race, color, national origin, age, disability, sex, gender identity, religion, reprisal, and where 
applicable, political beliefs, marital status, familial or parental status, sexual orientation, or all or part of an individual's 
income is derived from any public assistance program, or protected genetic information in employment or in any program or 
activity conducted or funded by the Department. (Not all prohibited bases will apply to all programs and/or employment 
activities.)  
 
If you wish to file an employment complaint, you must contact your agency's EEO Counselor (PDF) within 45 days of the 
date of the alleged discriminatory act, event, or in the case of a personnel action. Additional information can be found online 
at http://www.ascr.usda.gov/complaint_filing_file.html.  
 
If you wish to file a Civil Rights program complaint of discrimination, complete the USDA Program Discrimination 
Complaint Form (PDF), found online at http://www.ascr.usda.gov/complaint_filing_cust.html, or at any USDA office, or call 
(866) 632-9992 to request the form. You may also write a letter containing all of the information requested in the form. Send 
your completed complaint form or letter to us by mail at U.S. Department of Agriculture, Director, Office of Adjudication, 
1400 Independence Avenue, S.W., Washington, D.C. 20250-9410, by fax (202) 690-7442 or email at 
program.intake@usda.gov.  
Individuals who are deaf, hard of hearing or have speech disabilities and you wish to file either an EEO or program complaint 
please contact USDA through the Federal Relay Service at (800) 877-8339 or (800) 845-6136 (in Spanish).  
 
Persons with disabilities who wish to file a program complaint, please see information above on how to contact us by mail 
directly or by email. If you require alternative means of communication for program information (e.g., Braille, large print, 
audiotape, etc.) please contact USDA's TARGET Center at (202) 720-2600 (voice and TDD).  
 
For any other information dealing with Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) issues, persons should either 
contact the USDA SNAP Hotline Number at (800) 221-5689, which is also in Spanish or call the State Information/Hotline 
Numbers.  
For any other information not pertaining to civil rights, please refer to the listing of the USDA Agencies and Offices for 
specific agency information. 
 

Helping People Help the Land 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

 

 

