 
 

 

Plant Guide

 
Uses 
 
Wildlife 
Manzanita not only provides habitat to many Pacific 
animals, but supplies food to them as well. It has thick 
foliage (shrubbery) that offers many animals cover from 
predation. Small mammals, song birds and game birds eat 
and enjoy the fruits all throughout the summer (Kauffman 
and Martin, 1991; Martin, 1951) (Table 1). Then through 
fecal deposition the animals disperse A. viscida seeds 
(Kauffman and Martin, 1991). Deer frequently forage on 
the twigs and leaves (Martin et al., 1951) (Table 1).  
 

Fruits (Birds) 

Fruits (Mammals) 

Leaves and Twigs 
(Ungulates) 

California Jays (Cyanocitta 
stelleri and Aphelocoma 
californica), Mocking Bird 
(Mimus polyglottos), Fox Sparrow 
(Passerella iliaca), Wild Turkey 
(Meleagris gallopavo), Dusky or 
Blue Grouse (Dendragapus 
obscures), and Band Tailed 
Pigeon (Columba fasciata) 
(Sibley, 2000) 
Raccoon (Procyon lotor), 
California Skunk (Mephitis spp.), 
Western Chipmunk (Tamias 
 spp.), CA Ground Squirrel 
(Otospermophilus beecheyi), 
Mantled Ground Squirrel 
(Spermophilus lateralis), Rock 
Squirrel (Spermophilus 
atricapillus), Coyote (Canis 
latrans), Black Bear (Ursus 
americanus) , and dusky footed 
woodrat (Neotoma fuscipes) 
Black-tailed Deer (Odocoileus 
hemionus columbianus), Mule 
Deer (Odocoileus hemionus) 
(Reed, 2006) 

Table 1: Beneficial parts of Arctostaphylos viscida for Pacific    
  animals (Howard, 1992; Martin, 1951). 
 

Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Description 
General: Family (Ericaceae). The genus Arctostaphylos 
consists of trees and shrubs. Out of the sixty species, fifty-

STICKY WHITELEAF 

MANZANITA 

Arctostaphylos viscida Parry 

Plant Symbol = ARVI4 

Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Lockeford  Plant Materials 
Center, Lockeford, CA  

 

Figure 1: Arctostaphylos viscida , Walker Ridge CA 2009. Photo 
Lockeford Plant Materials Center.  

Alternate Names 
Common Alternate Names:  Sticky whiteleaf manzanita 
Scientific Alternate Names:  There are currently three 
recognized subspecies: 
 
A. viscida ssp. mariposa (Dudley) P.V. Wells 
A. viscida ssp. pulchella (Howell) P.V. Wells 
A. viscida ssp. viscida  
 
Sticky whiteleaf manzanita commonly hybridizes with 
hoary manzanita (Arctostaphylos canescens) and 
greenleaf manzanita (Arctostaphylos patula) likely 
hybridizes with A. viscida ssp. mariposa and  A. viscida 
ssp. viscida (Howard, 1992). 

 

seven are native to California.  Manzanita has beautiful 
red bark and, like the conifer, holds its leaves year round 
(Stuart and Sawyer, 2001). Different manzanita species 
often hybridize with each other because the distribution of 
species tends to be local, so identification down to species 
is difficult when habitats overlap (Ferris, 1968; Hickman, 
1993; Stuart and Sawyer, 2001). 
 
Sticky whiteleaf manzanita is an erect, tree-like shrub 
growing from 3 to 12 feet in height. The stems and twigs 
can be smooth and hairless, have short stiff hairs or have 
glands or gland-like structures on them. The leaves stand 
upright and have an ovate to round shape and can be 
classified as evergreen (Figure 1). The surface of the leaf 
can be smooth and hairless or have stiff hairs, glands and 
rounded nipple-like bumps called papilla. 
 
The flowering part of the plant (inflorescence) is panicle-
like (Hickman, 1993; Howard, 1992; McMinn, 1939; 
Tucker, 2009). The flowers on manzanita are round and 
often referred to as “urn or bell shaped” with five lobes 
and are pinkish white. The flowering period is from 
February to April (Howard, 1992; Keator, 1994; McMinn, 
1939). The fruits resemble tiny apples (the Spanish name 
for apple is manzana) which are sticky and are available  
early to late summer through early fall (Keator, 1994; 
Stuart and Sawyer, 2001). 
 

Ethnobotany 
Ethnobotanical: Sticky whiteleaf manzanita is a highly 
beneficial plant native to California, the berries of sticky 
whiteleaf manzanita were highly valued by the Maidu, 
Miwok, Wintu and possibly other tribes for eating and the 
making of a delicious cider (Merriam 1967). In making 
cider, the Miwok tribe would crush the berries (pai) with 
a grinding tool. Water was then poured over the crushed 
berries, collecting the entire flavor as it passed through 
(we can compare this process to making coffee)  (Figure 
2).  
 

 
Figure 2: Making manzanita cider. Crushed manzanita berries are in 
the top winnowing basket and water is poured over the berries and 
caught in a water-tight basket below. Photograph courtesy of Yosemite 
National Park. 

If any of the berries passed through, the liquid would be 
decanted (Barrett and Gifford, 1933; Du Bois, 1935). The 
Indians at Chowchilla filtered manzanita cider using deep 
round openwork bowl baskets (Merriam, 1955). The 
beverage would keep without souring for up to four days. 
The cider was sweet and always drank before 
fermentation because fermentation would make it sour 
(Barrett and Gifford, 1933; Du Bois, 1935). 
Anthropologist Cora Du bois (1935:20) describes the 
processing and cooking of the berries among the Wintu: 
”Berries pounded into coarse flour, dampened, next 
morning dried and parched with hot rocks. Winnowed. 
Fine flour boiled with water and made into sweetish 
soup.” 
 
Tribes known to have eaten the berries raw and also dried 
and stored for winter include the Wintu (Harrington, 
1984; Knudtson, 1977). However, tribes in the Yosemite 
region chewed the berries for flavor, but did not swallow 
them (Barrett and Gifford, 1933). The Maidu pounded the 
berries in mortars and ate them without other treatment 
(Merriam 1967). 
 
The berries were collected from the manzanita bush by 
hand picking into burden baskets that were hung around 
the neck or by using flat sifting baskets placed underneath 
the shrub. The branches would then be shaken and the 
berries would collect into the baskets (Barrett and 
Gifford, 1933; Dubois, 1935).   
 
Sticky whiteleaf manzanita was also used medicinally 
among Native American tribes. The Wintu tribes used the 
leaves in tea to alleviate diarrhea and they soaked the 
leaves to relieve poison oak symptoms (Knutdson, 1977). 
The Miwok tribes chewed the leaves to help ease pain 
associated with cramps and stomachaches (Barrett and 
Gifford, 1933).  
 
Indigenous stewardship methods traditionally used for 
management of this plant were frequent cool temperature 
prescribed burns.  

Distribution:  Sticky whiteleaf manzanita ranges from the 
Sierra Nevada foothills to the North Coast Ranges, 
Klamath Ranges and Siskiyou Mountains at elevations of 
152 to 1,524 meters. It is “most commonly found in the 
Sierra Nevada foothills from Shasta County to Amador 
County” (McMinn, 1939). For current distribution, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Website. 
 
Habitat:  Manzanita can be found in chaparral, yellow-
pine forests, rocky slopes, woodlands, coniferous forest, 
sandstone outcrops, shale outcrops, subalpine forest, 
serpentine soils, ridges and open areas (Ferris, 1968; 
Hickman, 1993).     

Adaptation 

 

 

Sticky whiteleaf manzanita is shade intolerant, and 
therefore, often becomes the dominant or co-dominant 
plant in the landscape (Howard, 1992). 

Establishment 
A hot and forceful fire will wipe out all sticky whiteleaf 
manzanita, but will also stimulate dormant seeds in the 
soil (Howard, 1992; Hughes et al., 1987).  Seeds will 
germinate the first growing season after the fire (Howard, 
1992). This plant will become dominant in the landscape 
three to four years after a fire (Hughes et al., 1987).  
Sticky whiteleaf manzanita stands will then reach sexual 
maturity a decade after the original fire (Detling, 1961). 

Management 
To avoid severe wildfires, it is recommended to do 
prescribed burns in these communities (Green, 1977). 
Sticky whiteleaf manzanita fuels fire by consistently 
shredding bark and having branches that die off during 
drought years (Minore, 1988). The leaves and twigs 
provide optimal air circulation because of their “surface-
to-volume” ratio which helps the plant completely burn 
and intensifies the fire (Green, 1977). Furthermore, 
terpenes and flammable oils are found in the leaves and 
twigs (Philpot, 1969). In areas where fire is suppressed, 
unusually high amounts of debris from sticky whiteleaf 
manzanita will be left on the ground.  

Pests and Potential Problems 
Swiecki at el. (2003) found root and crown rot when A. 
viscida  habitat overlapped with Ione manzanita 
(Arctostaphylos myrtifolia) on Ione Formation soil. The 
pathogen was identified as Phytophthora cinnamomi. 
However, this pathogen has not been reported as causing 
significant damage to native California stands. 

Environmental Concerns 
There are no known environmental concerns associated 
with sticky whiteleaf manzanita.  

Seeds and Plant Production 
Collect seeds in August through October (Kaufmann, 
1991) in a small paper or cloth bag. Seeds should be 
completely dried and then stored in a cool, dry room with 
proper air circulation until propagation.  
 
Seed propagation can be challenging because of the thick 
coat around the seed (Hart, 2005). The seeds require at 
least two months to germinate (Emery, 1988).Seeds have 
to be scarified before germination either with fire or acid 
(Stuart and Sawyer, 2001). For example, seeds can be 
treated with dilute sulphuric acid for two to four hours.  
Seeds and acid should be put in a glass container and 
stirred periodically with a glass rod.  After scarification, 
seeds should be sown in a medium and placed outside. To 
scarify with fire, spread seeds in a damp medium, then 
place a layer of pine needles or excelsior on top to ensure 
the fire becomes hot enough. After the fire, water the 
seeds thoroughly and leave the container outside (caution: 
never use plastic containers when treating with fire).  

 

 

For vegetative propagation, cut the semi-mature previous 
season’s growth between December and January.  “Treat 
with a hormone solution for 10 seconds. Place in medium 
that is 1 peat: 10 perlite rooting mix” (Hart, 2005). Place 
in a shaded area outside, mist and water as necessary.  
After roots have established, place in a medium of  “1 
sand: 7 peat: 7 perlite.”   Whiteleaf manzanita requires 
proper drainage and aeration in the soil. 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
These plant materials are available as seed and plants 
from commercial sources in California.  
 
No known cultivar for this species. 

References 
Barrett, S.A., and E.W. Gifford. 1933. Indian life of the 
Yosemite region, Miwok material culture. Bull. of 
Milwaukee Public Museum 2(4).  The Yosemite 
Assoc. El Portal, CA. 

Detling, L.E., 1961. The chaparral formation of 

Southwestern Oregon, with consideration of it’s 
postglacial history. Ecology. 42(2): 348-357. 

Du Bois, C.A., 1935. Wintu ethnography. American 
Archaeology and Ethnology 36(1). University of 
California Publications. 

Emery, D. 1988. Seed propagation of native California 

plants. Santa Barbara Botanic Gardens, Santa 
Barbara, CA. 

Ferris, R.S., 1968.  Native shrubs of the San Francisco 

Bay region.  University of  California Press, 
Berkeley, CA.   

Green, L.R., 1977. Fuel reduction without fire—current 

technology and ecosystem impact.  In: Mooney, 
Harold A., Conrad, C.E, technical coordinators. Proc. 
of the symp. on the environmental consequences of 
fire and fuel management in Mediterranean 
ecosystems; Palo Alto, CA. Gen. Tech. Rep. WO-3. 
Washington, DC: USDA, Forest Service: 163-171. 
Harrington, J.P. and B.R. Bocek., 1984.  Ethnobotany of 

Costanoan Indians, California.  Economic Botany 
38(2).  New York Botanical Gardens,  NY, NY. 

Hart, L., 2005. Propogation and cultivation of 

Arctostaphylos in relation to the environment in its 
natural habitat in California. Combined Proceedings 
International Plant Propagators’ Society 55. 

Hickman, J.C. (ed.). 1993. The Jepson Manual. University 

of California Press, Berkeley, CA. 

Howard, J. L. 1992. Arctostaphylos viscida.  In: Fire 

Effects Information System, [Online].  USDA, Forest 
Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fire 
Sciences Laboratory (Producer). Available: 
http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/ [2011, May 25]. 

Hughes, T.F., Christopher, R. L., Tappeiner, J.C. II, 

Newton, M. 1987. Biomass and leaf-area estimates 
for varnish leaf ceanothus, deerbrush, and whiteleaf 
manzanita. Western Journal of Applied Forestry. 
2(4).  

Kauffman, J.B. and R.E. Martin., 1991. Factors 

influencing the scarification and germination of three 
montane Sierra Nevada shrubs. Northwest Science. 
65(4). 

Keator, G., 1994. Complete garden guide to native shrubs 

of California. Chronicle books, San Francisco, CA. 
Knutdson, P.M., 1977. Wintun Indians of California and 

their neighbors. Naturegraph. 

Martin, A., Zim, H.S., and A. Nelson., 1951. American 
wildlife and plants, a guide to wildlife food habits.  
McGraw Hill, NY,  

McMinn, H.E., 1939. An illustrated manual of California 

Shrubs.  University of California Press, Berkeley, 
CA. 

Merriam, C.H. 1967. Ethnographic notes on California 

Indian tribes. III. Ethnological notes on central 
California Indian tribes. Compiled and Edited by R.F. 
Heizer. Reports of the California Archaeological 
Survey No. 68, Part III. University of  

California Archaeological Research Facility, Dept. of 

Anthropology, Berkeley. 

Merriam, C.H., 1955. Studies of California Indians. 
University of California Press, Berkeley, CA.  

Minore, D., Weatherly, H.G., Means, J.E. 1988. Growth 

of whiteleaf manzanita (Arctostaphylos viscida 
Parry). Forest Science. 34(4). 

Philpot, C.W., 1969. Seasonal changes in heat content and 

ether extractive content of chamise. Res. Pap. INT-
61. Ogden, UT: USDA, Forest Service, 
Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment Station. 

Reed, F.A., 2006. Peterson’s field guides, mammals of 
North America. Houghton Mifflin Co., NY, NY. 
Sibley, D.L., 2000. The Sibley guide to birds. 
Chanticleer Press, Inc., NY, NY. 

Stuart, J.D. and J.O. Sawyer., 2001.  Trees and  shrubs of 
California.  University of California Press, Berkeley, 
CA. 

Swiecki, T.J., Bernhardt, E.A. and M. Garbelotto.,  
2003.  First report of root and crown rot caused by 

Phytophthora cinnamomi affecting  native stands of 
Arctostaphylos myrtifolia  and A. viscida in 
California. Plant Disease. 87: 1395. 

Tucker, G.C., 2009. In: Flora of North America 

Paeoniaceae to Ericaceae 8: 
Magnoliophyta:  
170. Oxford University Press. NY, NY. Available: 
http://www.efloras.org/ [2011, June 7]. 

  
Prepared By:  Cathy Shirley, USDA NRCS Plant 
Materials Center, Lockeford, CA with support from the 
BLM and the Chicago Botanical Garden. 

Citation 
Shirley, C. 2011. Plant Guide for sticky whiteleaf 
manzanita (Arctostaphylos viscida). USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, California Plant 
Materials Center, Lockeford, CA 95237. 

Published: April, 2012  
Edited: 24Aug2011aym; 06Sep2011mka; 29Mar2012jab; 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

