 
 

 

Plant Guide

parks and other recreational areas throughout its range. 
Due to its fast-growing nature and nitrogen-fixing 
capabilities, buckbrush is a great pioneer species for new 
landscapes (Las Pilitas Nursery, 2011). It is also a 
valuable shrub species for pollinator hedgerows, and 
attracts many bees with its fragrant flowers in the early 
spring. There are several cultivars of Ceanothus cuneatus 
available at local nurseries. 

Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Description 
General: Buckthorn family (Rhamnaceae).  California 
buckbrush is an erect, perennial, evergreen shrub within 
the California lilac (Ceanothus) genus.  The species 
ranges in size from 3 to 12 feet tall.  As with other 
California lilac species, buckbrush shrubs are distinct 
from other woody chaparral plants with their unique 
pattern of angular, rigid branchlets of unequal sizes.  The 
twigs are round and gray colored and do not have hairs or 
spines.  The evergreen leaves on this species are in an 
opposite arrangement, generally 0.25 - 0.5 in long.  The 
leaves are generally smooth and entire, sometimes with a 
toothed margin near the apex.  The inflorescence, 
generally less than 1 inch, is displayed as a raceme with 
several umbellate clusters, each containing many fragrant 
flowers.  The flowering period of this species is between 
March and May and the flower colors ranges from white 
to several shades of blue and lavender.  The fruits are 0.25 
- 0.5 in long and have 3 distinct horns near the top 
without crests or ridges.  Each fruit capsule contains two 
to three seeds (McMinn, 1939; Hickman, 1993).  

Ethnobotany 
As one of the dominant species in the chaparral 
ecosystem, this shrub has been utilized by California 
Native Americans for centuries.  

Buckbrush shrubs contain a significant amount of woody 
material and several California tribes including the 
Kawaiisu and the Miwok used this species for firewood 
(Zigmond, 1981; Merriam, 1967).  The twigs were also 
collected for a variety of hunting and fishing purposes. 
The Kawaiisu used the straight twigs of this shrub as the 
foreshafts for two-piece arrows.  The arrows were created 
by stripping and sharpening the Ceanothus twigs and 
fitting them inside sections of hollow Carrizo grass of 
“cane” (Zigmond, 1981).  Indians of Mendocino used 
buckbrush woody material to create fish dams (Chestnut, 
1902).  

BUCKBRUSH 

Ceanothus cuneatus (Hook.) Nutt. 

Plant Symbol = CECU 

Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Lockeford Plant Materials 
Center, Lockeford, CA  

Figure 1: Ceanothus cuneatus branches. Photo M. DeSiervo Lockeford 
Plant Material Center. 

 

Alternate Names 
Common Alternate Names:   
buckbrush  
buckbrush ceanothus 
blue brush   
cuneate ceanothus 
wedgeleaf ceanothus  
Native American traditional names include: 
bä-käm’ (Pomo tribe)  
hit (Wailaki tribe) (Chestnut, 1902). 
 

Uses 
Wildlife: Deer will forage on the leaves, shoots and 
berries of buckbrush, preferring the tender young 
seedlings to the mature plants. Additionally, small rodents 
and birds including the quail and mourning dove feed on 
the seeds (League, 2005). Buckbrush is also an important 
cover species for wildlife, due to its size and abundance 
of branchlets.  

 Buckbrush is also an important species for pollinators 
such as bees, butterflies and hummingbirds.   

Landscaping: Along with other native Ceanothus species, 
Ceanothus cuneatus is an aesthetically pleasing shrub 
commonly integrated in the outdoor landscape of homes, 

 

Buckbrush was also used for traditional Native American 
tools. Seed beaters were constructed using the rigid 
woody material of the shrub.  Consisting of a basket with 
a handle, the seed beaters were used to “thrust over the 
spike or inflorescence of a grass of wildflower to knock 
off the grains and seeds into a burden basket” (Anderson, 
2005).  The Paiute and Miwok tribes used the rigid 
buckbrush wood to create digging sticks (Steward, 1933).  
Barrett and Gifford (1933) describe this tool as a three to 
four foot long stick that was hacked off with a sharp 
stone, scraped with flint, and hardened by fire.  The tool 
was held as a staff and thrust into the ground as a digging 
device.  Sharpened buckbrush twigs were also utilized by 
the Pit River tribe to create slender needles used in the 
piercing of earlobes of young girls (Merriam, 1967).  
Similarly, the Tubatulabal used the sharpened twigs as a 
skewer for roasted pinyon nuts (Voegelin, 1938).   

To this day, Ceanothus cuneatus is an extremely valuable 
species for basketry.  Several characteristics of buckbrush 
including its color, length and strength make it an ideal 
species for this craft.  The young shoots in particular are 
highly valued for basketry. The Miwok and Mono Indians 
historically manipulated stands of buckbrush by pruning 
and coppicing to induce rapid elongation of young growth 
and burning to encourage new seedlings (Anderson, 1991, 
2005).  
 
 Buckbrush branches are often used in the construction of 
burden baskets.  According to Barrett and Gifford (1933), 
the burden baskets used by the Miwok Indians were 
reinforced by using a hoop made of Ceanothus cuneatus 
wood, placed midway down inside the basket.  Buckbrush 
branches were also used by the Mono for the hood of 
cradleboards and the rims of winnowers and seed beaters 
(Anderson, 2005). The Sierra Miwok made shallow 
openwork scoop baskets of buckbrush called cham-ah, 
used for drying green acorns, and in later times for drying 
domesticated fruits such as peaches and figs. the 
foundation of some Miwok coiled baskets used for acorn 
mush are made of young buckbrush shoots (Merriam, 
1967). 

Distribution:   
Ceanothus cuneatus is widely distributed through 
California, Oregon and northern Baja California, Mexico, 
generally at elevations less than 6000 ft.  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site. 

Habitat:   
Buckbrush is one of the primary shrub species in the 
chaparral ecosystem.  It is commonly found on dry, rocky 
slopes and ridges along with associated shrub species 
including chamise (Adenostoma fasciculatum) and 
whiteleaf manzanita (Arctostaphylos viscida) (Baker, 
1982).  In some places, Ceanothus cuneatus outcompetes 
other shrub species to form dense, impenetrable thickets 

 

(McMinn, 1939).  These ecosystems are known as 
ceanothus chaparral vegetation type.  
 
Ceanothus cuneatus is adapted to serpentine soils, and 
can therefore serve as a good indicator species for field 
identification of serpentine soils in California and Oregon 
(Kruckeberg, 1984).  It should be noted however, that this 
species is more commonly found on non-serpentine soils 
of sandstone origins (Safford and Harrison, 2004). 
 
Buckbrush is also an important shrub species in the 
montane ecosystem where it often grows as an understory 
species in pine forests and oak woodland habitats. In the 
coastal sage scrub habitat type, buckbrush is present in 
areas in or near low elevation coastal aspects, along with 
the dominant species, California sagebrush (Artemisia 
californica).  Buckbrush is also found in inland dune 
habitats in small populations. (League, 2005).   

Adaptation 
Ceanothus cuneatus is adapted to the annual summer 
drought in the Mediterranean climate zone.  In a two year 
study comparing the phenology of chaparral shrubs, it 
was found that buckbrush undergoes branch elongation, 
leaf initiation and flowering in late winter and early 
spring before the onset of annual drought (Baker, 1982). 
 
Buckbrush is also well adapted to chaparral fires, and is 
widely considered to be a “fire recruiter” species. High 
temperatures are necessary to melt and crack the cuticle 
of buried seeds, facilitating high germination rates after 
fire (League, 2005).  McMinn (1939) noted that dense 
colonies of this plant can be formed within a few years 
after a major fire disturbance.   

Establishment 
The germination and establishment of Ceanothus 
cuneatus in its natural habitat is highly correlated with 
fire regime.  Germination rates in the spring following fire 
disturbance are generally quite high, but seedling survival 
varies according to soil moisture (Sweeney, 1956).  Since 
establishment occurs after fire, buckbrush typically forms 
even-aged stands (Keeley, 1982).   

Management 
Buckbrush stand maintenance is most successful with fire 
intervals of 30-100 years (Minnich, 1999; Paysen et al., 
2000).  This fire regime allows for larger quantities of 
seeds to accumulate in the seed bank.  In the mid-
twentieth century, it was believed that Native American 
burning practices led to the increase of several chaparral 
species, including Ceanothus cuneatus in oak woodlands 
(Biswell, 1956). 

Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no known pests or problems associated with 
buckbrush. 

 

 

Environmental Concerns 
There are no known environmental concerns associated 
with buckbrush. 

Seeds and Plant Production 
Ceanothus cuneatus fruits are usually ripe in late spring.  
When the seeds are ripe, the mature capsule bursts open 
with considerable force and the seeds can fall up to 35 
feet from the plant (Biswell and Gilman, 1961).  This 
seed-ejecting mechanism, while beneficial for the plant, 
can make seed collecting quite challenging.  One 
technique for seed collection is to tie cloth bags over 
clusters of green seed pods (Conard and Reed, 2003).  
Another method is to cut seedpod clusters before the 
capsules have split; however you must insure the seeds 
are mature, since prematurely collected seeds will not 
germinate successfully (Emery, 1988). 

Seed propagation is most successful using a combination 
of scarification and stratification techniques.  Seeds can 
be scarified with fire, or by using a hydrochloric acid  
mixture.  Seeds should then be refrigerated and stored in 
sealed containers for about two to three weeks.  In a 
greenhouse environment, germination of Ceanothus 
cuneatus was most successful when seeds were planted at 
depths of 0.5 to 1 inch (Adams, 1962; Belcher, 1985).  

Plants can also be propagated from semi-hard cuttings in 
the summer, or from root cuttings in the late fall to early 
winter.   

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
Buckbrush container stock is readily available through 
most nurseries within its range. Contact your local 
Natural Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  

'Sierra Snow' is a cultivar with showy, white flowers that 
grows2-3 meters tall and 2.5 meters wide.  It prefers full 
to partial sun and does well in plant hardiness zones 8, 9, 
10 and 11.  This cultivar thrives in dry, hot climates, is 
drought-tolerant and low maintenance, but is susceptible 
to aphids, root rot, and whiteflies (Sunny Gardens, 2011). 

‘Sierra Mt. Lilac’ is another cultivar with fragrant blue 
flowers. It typically grows into a large evergreen bush 
(about 8 feet) with a showy inflorescence during the 
spring. Due to its fast-growing nature and nitrogen fixing 
capabilities, this cultivar is commonly planted as a 
companion to slow-growing species such as oaks, 
coffeeberry and toyon (Las Pilitas Nursery, 2011). 

‘Snow Ball’ is a cultivar of Ceanothus cuneatus var. 
rigidus, otherwise known as Monterey ceanothus. It 
named for its showy white flowers which bloom in the 
early spring. This cultivar grows best in the coastal range 
climate, since it is endemic to this area and can be used as 
a scale ground cover species (Las Pilitas Nursery, 2011).  

 

 

Comparative phenology and growth in three 
chaparral shrubs. Botanical Gazette. Vol. 143(1) pp. 
94-100. 

Barrett, S.A. and E.W. Gifford. 1933. Miwok Material 

Culture: Indian life of the Yosemite Region. Bulletin 
of Milwaukee Public Museum. Vol. 2, No. 4. 
Yosemite Association, Yosemite National Park, CA.    

Belcher, E. 1985. Handbook on seeds of browse shrubs 

and forbs. Technical Publication R8-TP8. USDA-FS-
Southern Region and Association of Official Seed 
Analysts. Atlanta, Georgia. 

Biswell, H.H. 1956. Ecology of California grasslands. 

Journal of Forestry. Vol 9 pp19-24. 

Biswell, H.H. and J.H. Gilman. 1961. Brush management 
in relation to fire and other environmental factors on 
the Tehama deer winter range. California Fish and 
Game. Vol 47(4) pp. 357-389. 

Chestnut, V.K. 1902. Plants used by the Indians of 

Mendocino County, California Mendocino County 
Historical Society. Contributions from the U.S. 
National Herbarium. Vol. 7 pp. 295-408. 

Conard, S.G. and M.J. Reed 2003. Ceanothus L. [Online]. 

In F.T. Bonner (ed.) Woody plant seed manual. 
Available at 
http://www.nsl.fs.fed.us/wpsm/Ceanothus.pdf 
(accessed 31 May 2011). USDA-FS-National Tree 
Seed Laboratory, Washington, DC.  

References 
Adams, L. 1962. Planting depths for seeds of three 

species of Ceanothus. Res. Note PSW-194.USDA-
FS-Pacific Southwest For. and Range Exp. Stn., 
Berkeley, California.  

Anderson, M.K. 1991. Wild plant management: cross-

cultural examples of the small farmers of Jaumave, 
Mexico, and the southern Miwok of the Yosemite 
region. Arid Lands Newsletter. Tucson, Arizona, 
Office of Arid Lands Studies. Vol. 31 pp.18-23. 

Anderson, M.K. 2005. Tending the Wild: Native 

American Knowledge and the Management of 
California’s Natural Resources. University of 
California Press, Berkeley, CA.  

Baker, G.A., P.W. Rundel, and D.J. Parsons. 1982. 

Emery, D.E. 1988. Seed propagation of native California 
plants. Leaflets Santa Barbara Botanical Garden. Vol. 
1(10) pp. 90-91. 

Hickman, J.C. 1993. The Jepson Manual. University of 

California Press. Berkeley, CA.  

Keeley, J.E. 1982. Distribution of lightning- and man-

caused wildfires in California. pp. 431-437.  

Kruckeberg, A.R. 1984. California serpentines: flora, 

vegetation, geology, soils and management problems. 
Publications in Botany. Vol. 48. University of 
California Press. Berkeley, CA. 

 Las Pilitas Nursery. Ceanothus cuneatus. Sierra mt. lilac. 

Available at http://www.laspilitas.com/ 
accessed 1 Jun. 2011). Santa Margarita, CA. 

League, K.R. 2005. Ceanothus cuneatus. In Fire Effects 

Information System [Online]. Available at 
http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/ (accessed 1 Jun. 

2011). USDA-FS-Rocky Mountain Res. Stn., Fire 
Sci. Lab. 

McMinn, H.E. 1939. An Illustrated manual of California 

shrubs. University of California Press. Berkeley, CA.  

Merriam, C.H. 1967. Ethnographic notes on California 

Indian Tribes.III. Compiled and Edited by R.F. 
Heizer. Reports of the California Archaeological 
Survey No.58, Part III. University of California 
Archaeological Research Facility. Berkeley, CA. 

Minnich, R.A. 1999. Vegetation, fire regimes, and forest 

dynamics. pp. 44-80.  

Paysen, T.E., R.J. Ansley, J.K. Brown et al. 2000. Fire in 

western shrubland, woodland, and grassland 
ecosystems. p. 121-159. In J.K. Brown and J.K. 
Smith (ed.) Wildland fire in ecosystems: effects of 
fire on flora. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-42-v. 2. 
USDA-FS- Rocky Mountain Res. Stn., Ogden, UT.  
Safford, H.D., and S. Harrison. 2004. Fire effects on plant 

diversity in serpentine vs. sandstone chaparral. 
Ecology 85(2):539-548.  

Steward, J.H. 1933. Ethnography of the Owens Valley 

Paiute. Univ. of California Publ. in Am. Archaeology 
and Ethnology 33(3):233-250. 

Sunny Gardens. 2011. Sierra Snow Ceanothus. Available 

at http://www.sunnygardens.com/(accessed 1 Jun. 
2011). 

Sweeney, J.R. 1956. Responses of vegetation to fire: a 

study of the herbaceous vegetation following 
chaparral fires. Univ. of California Publ. in Bot. 
28(4):143-250.  

USDA, ARS, National Genetic Resources Program. 

Germplasm Resources Information Network - (GRIN) 
[Database].National Germplasm Resources 
Laboratory, Beltsville, Maryland. 

 

URL: http://www.ars-grin.gov/cgi-
bin/npgs/html/tax_search.pl (Accessed 2 July 2011). 

Voegelin, E.W. 1938. Tubatulabal ethnography. 

Anthropological Records 2(1):1-84. 

Zigmond, M.L. 1981. Kawaiisu ethnobotany. University 

of Utah Press, Salt Lake City, Utah.  

 
Prepared By:  Melissa DeSiervo, USDA NRCS Plant 
Materials Center, Lockeford, CA with support from the 
BLM and the Chicago Botanical Garden. 

Citation 
DeSiervo, M. 2011. Plant Guide for Buckbrush 
(Ceanothus cuneatus). USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Lockeford Plant Materials Center, 
Lockeford, CA 95237. 

Published: April, 2012  
Edited: 24Aug2011aym; 06Sep2011mka; 29Mar2012 jab; 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

