 
 

 

Plant Guide

and early settler. The Indians graciously taught them 
how to use it and it was called “Indian tea plant” by 
some non-Indians. The leaves were even used as a 
substitute for tea during the Revolutionary War 
(Hedrick 1972).  Today there is a demand for the 
plant’s essential oil for aromatherapy (Rogers 1997) 
and the plant is planted in gardens as an ornamental 
shrub. 
 
Large quantities of leaves were picked in spring 
before flowering by some native families while 
others picked them year round (Anderson 2009). The 
Ojibwa gathered the leaves from spring to autumn for 
a beverage tea (Smith 1932). The leaves were used 
either fresh or dried for future use. There were a 
number of ways to prepare tea, including adding a 
handful of leaves to boiling water and letting it 
simmer for several minutes or adding a handful of 
leaves to cold water, bringing it to a boil and 
simmering it for much longer (Stewart 2002). The 
Ojibwa, for example, tied fresh or dried leaves in a 
packet using a thin strip of basswood bark before 
placing in water to boil. The quantity was a large 
handful to a quart of water. It was drunk while hot 
and sweetened with maple sugar (Buttree 1932).  
 
Re-enacting an ancient custom, the Hoh, Quinault, 
Quileute, Klallam, and Makah still gather and steep 
the leaves and drink the resulting tea as a refreshing 
beverage (Anderson 2009; Gill 1984). Today, 
different Native American families keep a pot of this 
tea on the stove, ready for serving anytime (Stewart 
2002). Pat Boachup, Makah, (pers. comm.) says: “I 
still gather the leaves of the Indian tea every year. We 
pick off the leaves that have molded or spoiled. We 
collect the good leaves and put them in a warm place 
to dry. If the leaves stay in a plastic bag they will turn 
black. They are put in a paper bag next to a wood 
stove to dry. Then after they are dry you can put them 
in a plastic bag. I take a handful of leaves—enough to 
cover the top of the pot—and put them in the pan or 
pot with water. Take a fork and push down the 
leaves. When it starts boiling turn it down and steam 
it for 15 to 20 minutes.  When it turns a rich orange 
it’s ready. If steamed too long, it turns dark. I drink it 
most of the time hot with sugar. I gather four or five 
grocery bags of dried leaves from two sites every 
year. You can pick it all year round, but I usually go 
in the fall in September and October. I make sure I 
leave some leaves so as not to kill the plant.”  
 

BOG LABRADOR  

TEA 

Ledum groenlandicum Oeder 

Plant Symbol = LEGR 

Contributed by:  USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Team, Greensboro, NC 

 

Bog Labrador tea in Ahlstrom's Prairie, Olympic National Park.  
Photograph by M. Kat Anderson, 2007. 

Alternate Names 
Rhododendron groenlandicum (Oeder) Kron & Judd 
Labrador tea, Indian tea, Hudson Bay tea, James tea, 
marsh tea, swamp tea 

Uses 
Bog Labrador tea leaves are fragrant and were used 
as a beverage and medicine by many tribes such as 
the Quinault and Makah in western Washington, the 
Potawatomi in the Great Lakes region, and the 
Iroquois in the Northeast. This tea was as popular 
among tribes as green tea, chai and black teas are to 
Western culture today (Gunther 1973; Smith 1933; 
Hedrick 1933). First Nations in Canada also picked 
the leaves for a warm drink and medicine (Turner 
2004). 
 
CAUTION: Bog Labrador tea may be toxic in 
concentrated doses. It contains toxic alkaloids 
known to be poisonous to livestock, especially 
sheep (Pojar and MacKinnon 1994). 
  
The beverage was quickly adopted by Europeans 
because of its pleasant flavor, aroma and salutary 
effects (Franklin 1823; Umfreville 1954). It warmed 
the insides of many a non-Indian explorer, trapper, 

 

carcinoma cell lines (Dufour et al. 2007). 
 
Wildlife Use: The flowers of bog Labrador tea 
provide nectar for butterflies (Pettinger and Costanzo 
2002). The palm warbler (Dendroica palmarum) and 
Connecticut warbler (Oporornis agilis) nest in 
Sphagnum in bogs with bog Labrador tea and open 
conifer cover (Walkinshaw and Wolf 1957; Huff 
1929). Bog Labrador tea leaves and twigs are 
browsed by caribou and moose. 

Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Description 
General:  Heath family (Ericaceae). An erect, 
aromatic shrub that grows to one meter with twigs 
densely covered with long, soft hairs (villous). The 
narrow, leathery leaves are 2-5 cm long, alternate, 
and evergreen. The leaves are dark green above with 
edges that curl under along the margins, and there is a 
dense mat of orange-brown hairs on the underside. 
Numerous white flowers in tight clusters bloom from 
May to July. Each flower has a small five-toothed 
sepal tube with five separate petals, and 5-7 stamens. 
The fruit is a small, fuzzy capsule tipped with a 
persistent style (Marles et al. 2000; Pettinger and 
Costanzo 2002; Pojar and MacKinnon 1994).  

 

 

Bog Labrador tea distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS 
Database. 

 
Found in low to middle elevations across Alaska, 
Canada, and Greenland, south through the New 
England States, northern New Jersey, mountains of 
Pennsylvania, the northern Great Lake States, North 
and South Dakota, Idaho, Washington, and Oregon 
(Gleason and Cronquist 1991; Pettinger and Costanzo 
2002; Strong 2002; Fernald et al. 1958).  For current 

 

 

 

Pat Boachup, Makah, collecting bog Labrador tea on Ts'oo-yuhs 
Prairie, late September 2009.  Photograph by M. Kat Anderson, 
2009. 

 
Medicinal Use:  The sophistication and complexity of 
bog Labrador tea’s medicinal use is demonstrated by 
the wide variety of ailments that were treated with 
this plant. Hudson Bay Company writer Edward 
Umfrewille (1954) wrote in 1790 about the Indians 
and Europeans of Canada and how they used the tea 
medicinally: “Its virtues are many; it is an aromatic, 
very serviceable in rheumatic cases, strengthens the 
stomach, relieves the head, and also promotes 
perspiration. Outwardly, it is applied to gangrenes, 
contusions, and excoriations; in the latter case the 
powder is made use of.”  
 
Tribes used the leaves to treat inflammatory 
pathologies such as asthma, rheumatism, and burns; 
diseases of the liver and kidney and many other 
sicknesses (U’mista Cultural Society et al. 1998; 
Gunther 1973). The Makah, for example used a 
strong infusion for a blood purifier (Gunther 1973). 
The leaves were used by the Ojibwa as a medicine 
for treating ulcers (Densmore 1974). Cree and the 
Metis of Canada continue to use it, drunk as a tea or 
leaves chewed and the juice swallowed, to treat 
stomach flu, diarrhea, chills and bad breath, 
pneumonia and difficulty urinating (Marles et al. 
2000). The Innu (formerly the Montagnais-Naskapi) 
of Labrador still treat sore throats and headaches by 
chewing the leaves, but not swallowing (Olsson n.d.). 
The Denyaavee of Alaska still use a tea of the leaves 
for settling upset stomachs, easing heartburn, and 
helping to ease arthritis pain. A tea made from the 
flowers is good for combating a cold. The cooled tea 
is a wash for skin problems and works well for sore 
throats when gargled (Tanana Chiefs Conference, 
Inc. 1999). 
 
Recent studies support its ethnopharmacological use, 
showing significant anti-inflammatory and 
antioxidant activities from methanol extracts of 
leaves and twigs. Bog Labrador tea twig extracts 
were found to be active against lung and colon 

distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Habitat:  Bog Labrador tea grows in bogs, fens, 
muskegs, open tundra, and dwarf shrub communities. 
It covers significant areas in bogs with black and 
white spruce (Picea mariana and Picea glauca), and 
tamarack (Larix laricina) in the boreal forests of 
Canada and high-elevation northeastern United 
States; eastern hemlock (Tsuga canadensis), pitch 
pine (Pinus rigida), eastern white pine (Pinus 
strobus), sugar maple (Acer saccharum), white ash 
(Fraxinus americana), and paper birch (Betula 
papyrifera) in the Northeast and Great Lakes region; 
as an understory shrub in open or closed moist forests 
in association with lodgepole pine (Pinus contorta 
var. contorta), Sitka spruce (Picea sitchensis) and 
western hemlock (Tsuga heterophylla) in the Pacific 
coastal forests of Oregon, Washington, Canada, and 
Alaska; and shrub birch (Betula glandulosa) in the 
Yukon (Gleason and Cronquist 1991; Pettinger and 
Costanzo 2002; Strong 2002; Tiner 1991).  

Establishment 
Plants can be started from seed or root-crown 
division. Collect the seeds from dry capsules and 
plant them in fall or spring in a moist peaty soil, in a 
sunny spot. Water them thoroughly after planting and 
keep moist. Suckers with roots can be split off from 
the base of the plant in mid-December and 
transplanted during spring (Pettinger and Costanzo 
2002; MacKenzie 1997; Young and Young 1992; 
Dirr and Heuser 1987). 

Management 
Many of the fens and bogs that provide important 
habitat for bog Labrador tea in North America were 
created by glaciation. These wetlands have been 
disappearing over thousands of years, due to a 
decrease in native ungulates that graze the bogs, and 
encroachment by conifers and hardwoods. Indians in 
different regions burned these wetlands periodically 
(Anderson 2009; Day 1953; Patterson and Sassaman 
1988). The primary role of fire was to maintain open 
habitats such as prairies, bogs, and forest clearings. 
Forest encroachment would have reduced sunlight 
that the bog Labrador tea plants needed, increased 
competition for nutrients, and made the plants more 
difficult to get to and harvest. Burning also had a 
directly beneficial effect on individual plants, 
maintaining vigor and stimulating new growth. Bog 
Labrador tea is fire tolerant (Mallik and Mallik 
1997), responding to low-intensity fires by 
resprouting from stems. If completely top-killed, the 
plant regenerates from root crowns and rhizomes 
(Calmes and Zasada 1982; Parminter 1984). 
Regeneration is typically rapid (Scotter 1972). Indian 
tea can even survive severe fires because the 
rhizomes lie as deep as 50 cm in the soil (Flinn and 
Wein 1977). The young leaves can become infected 

 

 

with a fungal disease, spruce needle rust, leaving 
powdery orange spores (Hiratsuka et al. 1995).  
 
Kate McCarty, a non-Indian woman married to a 
Makah, described bog Labrador tea on the Ts’oo-
yuhs prairie as producing better crops after the 
Makah burned it: “The Labrador tea can just keep 
growing and growing and growing until it gets real 
leggy. And all that you have is just a few little leaves 
on top. But after it’s been burned then it starts all 
over again. It’s just like pinching flowers off of the 
chrysanthemum to make them bush out” (Kate 
McCarty pers. comm.). 
 
Environmental Concerns 
 “People burned in the cranberry marsh to promote a 
better crop of cranberries and Indian tea. Our people 
have been drinking the Indian tea for thousands of 
years.  But you can never drink enough. A lot of 
people like the Indian tea. Another reason to burn 
was to keep the brush and trees from growing. 
Otherwise it would be a loss. The marsh behind the 
school [on the Makah Reservation], unless someone 
burns it, it will be history. It is being encroached by 
trees and shrubs. Unless they’re cut down and 
burned, they’ll eventually take over the cranberry 
marsh just like at Ozette” (Pat Boachup, Makah, pers. 
comm.). 

Control 
Please contact your local agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method.  Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, 
and other products may be equally effective. 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
This plant is available from native plant nurseries 
(Damrosch 2008). 

References 
Anderson, M.K. 2009. The Ozette Prairies of  

Olympic National Park: their former indigenous 
uses and management. Final report to Olympic 
National Park. Winter 2009. 

Buttree, J.M. 1932. Foods of the Omaha and  

Chippewa. The Totem Board 11(11):443-454. The 
Woodcraft League of America, Inc. Santa Fe.  
University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque. 

Calmes, M.A. and J.C. Zasada. 1982. Some  

reproductive traits of four shrub species in the 
black spruce forest type of Alaska. Canadian Field-
Naturalist 96(1):35-40. 

Damrosch, B. 2008. The Garden Primer: The  

Completely Revised Gardener’s Bible. Workman 
Publishing Co., Inc. New York, N.Y. 

Day, G. 1953. The Indian as an ecological factor in  

the northeastern forests. Ecology 34:329-346. 

Densmore, F. 1974. How Indians Use Wild Plants for  

Food, Medicine, & Crafts. 1974. Dover 
Publications, Inc. New York, N.Y. Originally 
published in 1928 in the Forty-fourth Annual 
Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology, 
1926-1927, pages 275-397. 

Dirr, M.A. and C.W. Heuser, Jr. 1987. The Reference  

Manual of Woody Plant Propagation. Varsity 
Press, Athens, GA. 

Dufour, D., A. Pichette, V. Mshvildadze, M.  

Bradette-Hébert, S. Lavoie, A. Longtin, C. Laprise, 
and J. Legault. 2007. Antioxidant, anti-
inflammatory and anticancer activities of 
methanolic extracts from Ledum groenlandicum 
Retzius. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 111:22-28. 
Fernald, M.L., A.C. Kinsey, and R.C. Rollins. 1958.  

Edible Wild Plants of Eastern North America. 
Harper and Row, Publishers. New York, N.Y. 

Flinn, M.A. and R.W. Wein. 1977. Depth of  

underground plant organs and theoretical survival 
during fire. Canadian Journal of Botany 55:2550-
2554. 

Franklin, Capt. J. 1823. Narrative of a Journey to the  

Shores of the Polar Sea in the Years 1819-22. 
London, England. 

Gill, S. 1984. Ethnobotany of the Makah People,  

Olympic Peninsula, Washington. Makah Language 
Program, Neah Bay, Washington and Marion 
Ownbey Herbarium Wasington State University, 
Pullman, WA. 

Gleason, H.A. and A. Cronquist. 1991. Manual of  

Vascular Plants of Northeastern United States and 
Adjacent Canada. The New York Botanical 
Garden. Bronx, N.Y. 

Gunther, E.. 1973. Ethnobotany of Western  
Washington: The Knowledge and Use of 
Indigenous Plants by Native Americans. Seattle: 
University of Washington Press. 

Hedrick, U.P. 1933. A History of Agriculture in the  
State of New York. New York State Agricultural 
Society, Albany, N.Y. 

___________. 1972. Sturtevant’s Edible Plants of the  

World. Dover Publications, Inc. N.Y., N.Y. 
Originally published by J.B. Lyon Company, 
Albany, in 1919 for the State of New York as the 
Department of Agriculture’s Twenty-seventh 
Annual Report, Volume 2, Part II [Report of the 
New York Agricultural Experiment Station for the 
Year 1919.] 

Hiratsuka, Y., D.W. Langor, and P.E. Crane 1995. A  

Field Guide to Forest Insects and Diseases of the 
Prairie Provinces. Nat. Resour. Can., Canadian 
Forest Service Special Report 3. Edmonton, 
Alberta. 

Huff, N.L. 1929. The nest and habits of the  

Connecticut warbler in Minneosota. The Auk 

 

 

46(4):455-465. 

MacKenzie, D.S. 1997. Perennial Ground Covers.  

Timber Press, Portland, OR. 

Mallik, I. and A.U. Mallik. 1997. Effects of Ledum  
groenlandicum amendments on soil characteristics 
and black spruce seedling growth. Plant Ecology 
133(1)29-36. 

Marles, R.J., C. Clavelle, L. Monteleone, N.  Tays,  

and D. Burns. 2000. Aboriginal Plant Use in 
Canada’s Northwest Boreal Forest. UBC Press, 
Vancouver, B.C. 

Olsson, K. n.d. Caribou bones and Labrador tea:  

traditional health care practices and their 
implications for nursing. Unpublished paper. 

Parminter, J. 1984. Fire-ecological Relationships for  
the Biogeoclimatic Zones of the Northern Portion 
of the Mackenzie Timber Supply Area Summary 
Report. Ministry of Forests, Province of British 
Columbia, Victoria, BC. 

Patterson, W.A. and K. E. Sassaman. 1988. Indian  
fires in the prehistory of New England. Pages 107-
135 in: Holocene Human Ecology in Northeastern 
North America. G.P. Nicholas (ed.). Plenum Press, 
New York, N.Y. 

Pettinger, A. and B. Costanzo. 2002. Native Plants in  

the Coastal Garden: A Guide for Gardeners in the 
Pacific Northwest. Timber Press. Portland, OR. 
Pojar, J. and A. MacKinnon (eds.) 1994.  Plants of  

the Pacific Northwest Coast: Washington, Oregon, 
British Columbia & Alaska. Lone Pine Publishing, 
Vancouver, British Columbia.  

Rogers, R. 1997. Aromatics and their use as  

medicine. Pages 53-54 In Proceedings of the 
Prairie Medicinal and Aromatic Plants Conference 
1997, Brandon, MB. 

Scotter, G.W. 1972. Fire as an ecological factor in  
boreal forest ecosystems of Canada. Pages 15-25 
In: Fire in the Environment. Symposium 
Proceedings May 1-5, 1972. U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service. Denver, CO. FS-276. 

Smith, H.H. 1932. Ethnobotany of  the Ojibwe  

Indians. Bulletin of the Public Museum of the City 
of Milwaukee 4(3):327-525. 

___________. 1933. Ethnobotany of the Forest  

Potawatomi Indians. Bulletin of the Public 
Museum of the City of Milwaukee 7:1(1-230). 

Stewart, H. 2002. Drink in the Wild: Teas, Cordials,  
Jams and More. Douglas & McIntyre. Vancouver, 
B.C. 

Strong, W.L. 2002. Lodgepole pine/Labrador tea type  

communities of western Canada. Can. J. Bot. 
80:151-165. 

Tanana Chiefs Conference, Inc. 1999. Denyaavee  

Medicine Plants of the Tanana Chiefs Conference 
Region. Fairbanks, Alaska. 

Tiner, R.W. 1991. The concept of a hydrophyte for  
wetland identification. BioScience 41(4):236-247. 
Turner, N. J. 2004. Plants of Haida Gwaii. Sononis  

Press, Winlaw, B.C. 

Umfreville, E. 1954. The Present State of Hudson’s  

 

Bay Containing a Full Description of that 
Settlement, and the Adjacent Country; and 
Likewise of the Fur Trade. The Ryerson Press, 
Toronto, Canada.U’mista Cultural Society, J. 

Walkinshaw, L.H. and M.A. Wolf. 1957. Distribution  
of the palm warbler and its status in Michigan. The 
Wilson Bulletin 69(4):338-351. 

Young, J.A. and C.G. Young. 1992. Seeds of Woody  

Plants in North America. Dioscorides Press. 
Portland, OR. 

 
Prepared By:  M. Kat Anderson, USDA NRCS 
National Plant Data Team, Greensboro, NC 

Citation 
Anderson, M., 2011. Plant Guide for bog Labrador 
tea (Ledum groenlandicum). USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, National Plant Data 
Team. Greensboro, NC. 
 
Acknowledgements 
The author would like to thank Doug Goldman and 
Roger Latham for editing this Plant Guide and 
providing citations. 

Published February 2012 
Edited: 15Feb2011jw 

For more information about this and other plants, 
please contact your local NRCS field office or 
Conservation District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ 
and visit the PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant Materials Program 
Web site http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or 
availability of other Web sites. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

