  

                          Plant Guide  

 

DEERGRASS 

Muhlenbergia rigens (Benth.) 

A.S. Hitchc. 

Plant Symbol = MURI2 

 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 

other birds as well.  In sunny openings where 
deergrass occurs, it forms a larval food plant for one 
of the Satyrid butterflies, the California ringlet 
(Coenonympha california) and for the umber skipper 
(Poanes melane).  Massive numbers of ladybugs 
overwinter in deergrass clumps. 
 
Conservation: Deergrass is a valuable streambank 
stabilizer, as it has an extensive root system, and if 
grown in dense enough colonies, it can be an 
effective weed suppresser.  In California, Pacific Gas 
and Electric is experimenting with growing dense 
colonies under powerline corridors.  It's long, slender 
culms, and tall tufts making it an attractive plant for 
the garden.  
 
Other Uses: Uses of deergrass include streambank 
stabilization, landscaping, forage, insectary, weed 
suppressant, and wildlife. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.   
 
Description 
General: Grass Family (Poaceae).  Deergrass is a 
perennial bunchgrass obtaining heights of 5 feet 
when in bloom.  It is part of the largest genus of 
warm season grasses in North America.  The 
bunchgrass is found in dense, large clumps, but can 
occur as a continuous cover, in areas that are 
subjected to light, frequent ground fires.  The culms 
are slender, narrow spike-like panicles, 9 to 12 dm. in 
length and less than 1.2 cm. wide.  The numerous, 
small spikelets each have one awnless floret, with a 
3-nerved lemma. The ligules are firm and truncate, 2-
3 mm long.  The leaves are 1.5 to 6 mm wide.  The 
seeds are small, requiring about 2.5 million to make 
one pound.  The dense, basal foliage is tufted and 
these large tufts, up to six feet across, are a 
distinguishing feature of the grass, along with the 
whip-like flower stalks. 
 
Distribution 
For current distribution, please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  It is found in sandy or gravely well-drained soils 
in scattered colonies in dry or damp places below 
2150 m elevation from Shasta County in northern 

© M. Kat Anderson 
NPDC @ PLANTS 

 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: Deergrass is a significant basketry 
material to central and southern California Native 
Americans who utilize the flower stalks in the 
foundations of coiled baskets.  Frequently thousands 
of flower stalks are needed for completion of each 
basket.  Culms are gathered in late spring while still 
green, or summer or early fall when golden brown 
depending upon the tribe, individual family 
preference and elevation of the deergrass site. 
 
Wildlife: In California, dense patches of deergrass 
provide cover during the fawning period of mule deer 
(Odocoileus hemionus) in mountain meadows and 
grassland openings.  The younger palatable tufts are 
grazed by deer, horses, and cattle and can remain 
palatable if continually grazed.  It is particularly 
sought for forage by animals when first resprouting 
after a burn.  Older tufts are poor feed for livestock.  
The seeds provide food for songbirds and probably 
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 

California south, extending into New Mexico, Texas, 
and Mexico.   
 
Establishment 
Adaptation: Deergrass can withstand periodic 
flooding, but it cannot tolerate poorly-drained soils.  
The major plant communities it inhabits include 
valley grassland, streamsides, and meadow habitat.  
Additionally, deergrass is shade-intolerant and also 
occurs in grassland openings within chaparral, mixed 
conifer forests, and oak woodland plant communities, 
maintained with human-set or lightning fires. On 
most soil types, these grassland areas quickly revert 
to the surrounding dominant vegetation type without 
human or natural disturbance. 
 
Broadcast Seeding: In California and the Southwest, 
deergrass can be broadcast seeded in the late spring 
or summer during the months of May, June, July, and 
August, with irrigation. The seeds are tiny and should 
be broadcast on top of the ground, and then run over 
with a ring roller or a culti-packer to compress the 
seeds slightly below the soil surface.  For best results, 
sow at least four pounds of PLS (pure live seed) per 
acre, which amounts to 50 seeds per square foot.  
Deergrass is slow growing and germination rates can 
vary from two weeks up to two months.  Fertilization 
of deergrass is not recommended, as it usually gives 
the alien weeds a competitive edge.  Site preparation 
is extremely important for good establishment of 
deergrass.  Both repetitive tillage and burning are 
recommended to drastically curtail weed competition.  
Repetitive tillage involves loosening the soil, 
irrigating, and cultivating the area with a disc harrow, 
following with a ring roller to kill the flush of annual 
weeds.  This is done several times prior to seeding to 
exhaust the weed seed bank.  Burning involves firing 
all residual dry matter prior to seeding.  
 
Container Planting: Container planting is a more 
effective and less time consuming way of 
establishing deergrass, but it is more costly than 
seeding on a large scale.  Deergrass seed can be sown 
into flats or, D-pots, stubby cells, or reforestation 
tubes in May.  Plants can be planted out from 
containers in the fall of the same year in soil that has 
been moistened with the first rains, using standard 
planting procedures.  Plants can also be sown in the 
fall in flats or containers and planted out the next 
summer or fall in the designated area.  Plants should 
be spaced at a minimum width of 24 inches.  
Irrigating is not necessary if it is a normal rainfall 
year.  Site preparation is the same as for a broadcast 
seeding.  Larger bunchgrasses can also be divided in 
winter or early spring and transplanted.  A good stand 
of deergrass can be established by container planting 

 

 

in one and one half years.  It is thought that container 
planting with grown plugs is more effective than a 
seeding. 
 
Management 
Once established, deergrass is quite drought-tolerant.  
To maintain its vigor and reduce accumulated dead 
material, deergrass can be mowed or burned every 
several years.  Burning or mowing should be in the 
fall, after it has gone to seed.  Many tribes 
historically and probably prehistorically enhanced 
deergrass populations through firing deergrass stands 
in the fall in California every two to five years.  
Indian-set fires increased flower stalk yields, recycled 
nutrients, cleared away detritus, and promoted 
seedling production in the midst of reduced 
competition from other plants.  According to Native 
American elders, these fires maintained the 
bunchgrass in greater numbers than would have 
occurred under natural conditions.   Knowledge of 
past indigenous fire management of deergrass has 
important implications for mountain meadow habitat 
management for wildlife and maintenance of 
grassland openings within shrublands, woodlands, 
and forests for preservation of indigenous cultural 
traditions.  Some areas could be managed with the 
dual objectives of indigenous harvesting of flower 
stalks and grazing after culm harvest.  There are 
several fungi that infect the leaves of deergrass, 
causing debilitation, but usually not death.  A fire 
would eliminate these pathogens. 

(cid:139) M. Kat Anderson 
NPDC @ PLANTS 
Basket foundation material consists of deergrass 

with red pattern material from the western 

redbud tree. 

 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
If possible, gather the seed from local sources, to 
maintain genetic diversity of deergrass.  The flower 
stalks can be cut, bundled, and then beat over a tarp 
or bucket to release the seeds.  The seeds are usually 
highly viable, and do not need special treatment.  

For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or Conservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

 

The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national origin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 

To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 

Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation 
Service.  
 

This grass is available from nurseries handling native 
plants.   
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Agricultural Experiment Station, University of 
Arizona 1953. Arizona range grasses: Description--
forage value---management.  Bulletin 298, Tucson, 
Arizona. 
 
Amme, D. 1994.  The development of native grasses 
in California.  Growing Native 5(2).  The newsletter 
of the Growing Native Research Institute.   
 
Anderson, M.K. 1996.  The ethnobotany of 
deergrass, Muhlenbergia rigens (Poaceae): its uses 
and fire management by California Indian tribes.  
Economic Botany 50(4):409-422. 
 
Edwards, S.W. 1989.  Ten splendid grasses.  The 
Four Seasons 8(3):17-24.  Journal of the Regional 
Parks Botanic Garden. 
 
Kephart, P. & D. Amme 1992. Native perennial 
grass establishment and management.  Grasslands 
(February): The newsletter of the California Native 
Grass Association. 
 
Lathrop, E. & B. Martin 1982.  Fire ecology of 
deergrass (Muhlenbergia rigens) in Cuyamaca 
Rancho State Park, California.  Crossosoma 8(5):1-4, 
9-10. 
 
Sampson, A.W., A. Chase, & D.W. Hedrick 1951. 
California grasslands and range forage grasses.  
California Agricultural Experiment Station Bulletin 
724.  
 
Stromberg, M.R. & P. Kephart 1996.  Restoring 
native grasses in California old fields.  Restoration 
and Management Notes 14(2):102-111. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Sciences Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 

Edited: 05dec00 jsp; 21may03 ahv; 060802 jsp 
 

 

 

