                          Plant Guide  

 

  

WOOLGRASS 

Scirpus cyperinus (L.) Kunth 

Plant Symbol = SCCY 

 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 

Iowa, and southward to North Carolina and 
Oklahoma.  It is also found from Newfoundland to 
Minnesota south to Florida and Louisiana (Tiner 
1987).  For current distribution, please consult the 
Plant profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site. 
 
Adaptation 
Woolgrass is found in irregularly flooded tidal fresh 
marshes, inland marshes, wet meadows, and swamps.  
This species grows best in areas with wet soil 
moisture content and is seldom found in more than a 
few inches of water (Voss 1972).  It prefers peat or 
sandy soil types in full to partially sunny locations. 
 
Establishment 
Propagation by Seed: Scirpus cyperinus seeds should 
be sown in a cold frame as soon as they are ripe in a 
pot standing in three centimeters of water.  The seeds 
germinate quickly.  When they are large enough to 
handle, plant them into their permanent positions in 
early summer. 
 
Large divisions can be planted directly into their 
permanent positions.  It is best to pot smaller 
divisions and grow them in a cold frame, out-planting 
when they are well established in the summer. 
 
Management 
After seed planting, water level over Scirpus 
cyperinus seeds should be maintained at one foot for 
two weeks.  Periodic flooding up to three feet should 
occur until the seeds are established.  
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Available through wetland plant nurseries.  Contact 
your local Natural Resources Conservation Service  
office for more information.  Look in the phone book 
under ”United States Government.”  The Natural 
Resources Conservation Service will be listed under 
the subheading “Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Braun, L.E. 1967.  The monocotyledoneae from cat-
tails to orchids.  The Ohio State University Press, 
Columbus, Ohio. 
 
Britton, N.L. & A. Brown 1970.  An illustrated flora 
of the northern United States and Canada.  Dover 
Publications, New York, New York. 
 

 
R. Mohlenbrock 
USDA, NRCS, Wetlands Institute 
                                  @ PLANTS

 
Alternative Names 
cotton grass bulrush, common wool-grass 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: Woolgrass stems were woven to make 
matting and ropes.  The fruiting tops of the plant 
were used as a resilient material for stuffing and 
making pillows (Moerman 1998).  The small rushes 
were used in making woven mats and storage bags 
(Ibid.). 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
General: Sedge family (Cyperaceae).  Woolgrass 
(Scirpus cyperinus) is a tall perennial with slender 
culms.  This species is an erect grasslike plant that 
commonly grows four to five feet (Tiner 1987).  The 
leaves are smooth, flat, elongated, and up to ½ inch 
wide.  The flowers occur in dense rounded clusters of 
greenish-brown spiklets arising from the top of the 
culm.  The fruits are yellow-gray to white achenes 
surpassed by long red-brown bristles at maturity. 
 
Distribution: Scirpus cyperinus ranges from New 
England and New York westward across Ohio to 
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 

Bruggen, T. V. 1976.  The vascular plants of South 
Dakota.  The Iowa State University Press, Ames, 
Iowa. 
 
Gleason, H. A. & A. Cronquist 1993.  Manual of 
vascular plants of northeastern United States and 
adjacent Canada.  2nd ed.  The New York Botanical 
Garden, Bronx, New York. 
 
Moerman, D. 1998.  Native American ethnobotany.  
Timber Press, Oregon. 
 
Radford, A.E., H.E. Ahles, & C.R. Bell 1968.  
Manual of the vascular flora of the Carolinas.  The 
University of North Carolina Press, Chapel Hill, 
North Carolina. 
 
Straughbaugh, P. D. & E. L. Core 1977.  Flora of 
West Virginia.  2nd ed.  Seneca Books, Inc., 
Morgantown, West Virginia. 
 
The Great Plains Flora Association 1986.  Flora of 
the Great Plains.  University Press of Kansas, 
Lawrence, Kansas. 
 
Tiner, R.W. Jr. 1987.  A field guide to coastal 
wetland plants of the northeastern United States.  
The University of Massachusetts Press, Amherst, 
Massachusetts. 
 
Voss, E.G. 1972.  Michigan flora.  Cranbrok Institute 
of Science, Bloomfield Hills, Michigan, and 
University of Michigan Herbarium, Ann Arbor, 
Michigan. 
 
Prepared By 
Jammie Favorite 
formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o Plant 
Sciences Dept., Davis, California 

Edited: 19jun02 jsp; 03jun03 ahv; 060816 jsp 
 
For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or Conservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

 

 

The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national origin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means for communication of program 

information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 

To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 

Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation 
Service.  
 

 

 

