  

                          Plant Guide  

 

EVERGREEN 

HUCKLEBERRY 
Vaccinium ovatum Pursh 

Plant Symbol = VAOV2 

 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center & Oregon Plant Materials Center 

stabilizing blood sugar levels in cases of diabetes, 
and medical research has shown that consumption of 
the leaf extract decreases blood sugar levels shortly 
after administration.  Taken on regular basis, 
huckleberry tea will gradually help alleviate both 
glycosuria and hyperglycemia and appears to have a 
beginning, but useful effect as an adjunct treatment to 
diabetes mellitus.  The leaves are believed also to 
stimulate appetite, and have astringent and antiseptic 
qualities that are useful in urinary disorders.  
 
Horticulture: Evergreen huckleberry is an excellent 
horticultural choice due to its beautiful, glossy, 
evergreen foliage and tolerance of a wide range of 
light levels.  The foliage is often used in flower 
arrangements.  
 
Wildlife & Livestock: The foliage of evergreen 
huckleberry is browsed by elk and deer.  Flowers 
attract butterflies.  For several species of grouse, 
huckleberries are among the most important summer 
and early fall foods.  Berries are eaten by chipmunks, 
black bear, mice, scarlet tanagers, bluebirds, thrushes, 
and other songbirds.  Deer and rabbit browse freely 
on the plants.  Because of their food value to wildlife 
and their dense shrubby growth, evergreen 
huckleberry is worthy of inclusion in hedgerows.  
 
In some localities goats and deer crop evergreen 
huckleberry rather closely, utilizing 30 to 40 % of the 
leafage and current twigs.  Sheep crop it somewhat 
less closely but it enters into their diet to a 
considerable extent in late summer and autumn.  The 
browse rating is fair to poor for sheep, goats, and 
deer; poor to useless to cattle; and useless for horses. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values.   
 
Description 
General: Heath Family (Ericaceae).  This erect, 
evergreen shrub is stout, from 0.5-3 m tall.  The 
glossy green leaf blades are 2-5 cm, ovate, leathery, 
serrate, with glandular hairs on the lower surface.  
The umbel-like inflorescence emerges from the leaf 
axils.  Urn-shaped flowers are bright pink.  The 
berries are 6-9 mm, purplish-black.  Evergreen 
huckleberry does not generally root easily. 
 

Alfred Brousseau 
© Brother Eric Vogel, St. Mary’s College 
@ CalPhotos

 
Alternate Names 
California huckleberry, shot huckleberry, 
huckleberry, winter huckleberry, evergreen 
huckleberry 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: Tribes in British Columbia and 
western Washington use the berries of evergreen 
huckleberry.  These tribes include the Sechelt, 
Comox, Straits, Halkomelem, Lower Nlaka'pamux 
Salish, Nuu-chah-nulth (Vancouver Island's West 
Coast), and the Quinault of Washington.  Evergreen 
huckleberries were well liked and people often 
traveled great distances to obtain them.  The berries 
ripen late in the year, around October or November.  
They are the last fruits to be gathered in the season 
round and are said to be even tastier after freezing.  
The berries are eaten fresh, usually with oil. The 
berries are also sun or smoke dried, partly mashed, 
pressed into cake form, and wrapped in leaves or 
bark.  Today they are made into jam or used in 
cooking. 
 
The leaves and berries are high in vitamin C.  The 
leaves and finely chopped stems contain quinic acid, 
a former therapeutic for gout said to inhibit uric acid 
formation but never widely used because of mixed 
clinical results.  The leaves have been widely used to 
lower or modify blood sugar levels.  Many herbalists 
maintain that huckleberry leaf tea may be useful in 
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 

Distribution 
For current distribution, please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  Evergreen huckleberry grows from the west side 
of the Cascades in Washington to the coast of British 
Columbia, to the redwood area of California.  It is 
sporadic south to Santa Barbara, California and in the 
coast ranges to the central Sierra Nevada Mountains. 
 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation: 
Vaccinium 
ovatum grows in 
edges and 
clearings of 
coniferous 
woods, at 
elevations from 
3-800 m.  
Evergreen 
huckleberry can 
also be found 
near beaches in 
the salt spray 
zone.  This 
huckleberry 
grows in moist to 
slightly dry soils.  
It will grow in 
full sun to full 
shade, although 
the plants prefer 
some shade. 
 
Propagation: Evergreen huckleberry can be difficult 
to propagate or transplant, but it is available in some 
nurseries.  It can be grown from cuttings, from seed, 
or by layering.  Huckleberry cuttings should be taken 
while the plant is dormant, from November to April.  
Their rooting success is fairly sporadic. 
 
Evergreen huckleberry requires excessive drainage 
and acidic soils to become established.  It does best in 
full or partial shade; it may tolerate morning and 
winter sun.  
 
Live Plant Collections: Evergreen huckleberry is 
propagated by cuttings from fully matured shoots 
taken in fall and winter, when the plant is dormant.  
Cuttings made from the previous year's growth taken 
the third week in April rooted 100% (Vancouver, 
B.C.).  Application of 0.3 to 0.4% IBA talc to the 
freshly cut stem surface and basal heat (21°C; 70° F) 
to potted plants will enhance rooting. 
 

 
Jeanne Russell Janish 
Used with permission of the publishers 
(cid:139) Stanford University 
& F i (1960)
Ab

 

 

Young plants can be salvaged, but they should be 
transplanted when they are less than one foot tall.  
Frequently, these small plants will turn out to be new 
shoots of a mature plant reviving from deer browsing 
or logging, and will die from lack of roots. 
 
Seed Collections: Berries should be collected when 
they are ripe (from August to September or later).  
The blue-black fruit is easily collected by hand 
picking or by beating the bush over a large bucket.  
Following collection, chill the fruit at 10°C for 
several days.  Clean seeds by macerating and floating 
off the pulp and unsound seed.  Clean seeds 
carefully; they are minuscule, so you may want to use 
pantyhose or cheesecloth to strain the seed from the 
pulp. 
 
Seeds dried at 15-21°C for two days can be stored in 
a refrigerator for up to 12 years.  Fresh seeds not 
planted in the fall may germinate better if cold 
stratified for 1-3 months.  Stored seeds germinates 
well when exposed to alternating temperature and 
light regimes of 28°C light for 14 hours a day and 
13°C dark for 10 hours. 
 
Fresh or stored and cold-stratified seeds can be sown 
directly into flats or small pots (a salt shaker can be 
used for sowing).  Plant in a mixture of sand and peat 
moss.  Seedlings will begin to emerge in a month and 
will continue to emerge for a long period thereafter.  
Transplant seedlings into larger pots 6 to 7 weeks 
after emergence.  Plant outside after the first growing 
season.  Seedlings are slow growing, and it may take 
2-3 years for a nursery-sized plant to develop.  
 
Management 
This plant grows very rapidly in moist, shady 
conditions.  If summer drought occurs, the plants 
should be watered so roots are kept fairly moist. 
 
Traditional Resource Management: This includes the 
following: 1) occasional burning to stimulate new 
growth; 2) pruning the branches after picking the 
berries to stimulate new growth and fruit production 
the next growing season; and 3) ownership of red 
huckleberry shrubs provides the basis for careful 
tending and sustainable yield of valued resources.  
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
This species is readily available from native plant 
nurseries within its range.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  
Look in the phone book under ”United States 
Government.”  The Natural Resources Conservation 

Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Abrams, L. & R.S. Ferris 1960.  Illustrated flora of 
the Pacific states.  4 Vols.  Stanford University Press, 
Palo Alto, California. 
 
Barton, B.J. 1997.  Gardening by mail.  A source 
book.  A Mariner Book.  Houghton Mifflin Company, 
Boston and New York. 
 
Cooke, S.S. 1997.  A field guide to the common 
wetland plants of western Washington and 
northwestern Oregon.  Seattle Audubon Society and 
Washington Native Plant Society.  414 pp. 
 
Crossley, J.A. 1974.  Vaccinium L. blueberry.  pp. 
840-843 IN: Shopmeyer, C.S. (tech. coord.) 1974. 
Seeds of the Woody Plants in the United States. 
Agric. Handbook 450. Washington, D.C. USDA, 
Forest Service. 883 pp. 
 
Gunther, E. 1973.  Ethnobotany of western 
Washington.  University of Washington Publications 
in Anthropology, 10(1).  University of Washington 
Press, Seattle, Washington. 
 
Harrington, H.D. 1972.  Western edible wild plants. 
The University of New Mexico Press. 156 pp. 
 
Hartmann, H.T., D.E. Kester, & F.T. Davies, Jr. 
1990.  Plant propagation principles and practices.  
Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.  
 
Hitchcock, C.L. & A. Cronquist 1973.  Pacific 
Northwest flora.  University of Washington Press, 
Seattle and London.  730 pp. 
 
Isaacson, R.T. 1993.  Anderson horticultural library's 
source list of plants and seeds. Anderson 
Horticultural Library.  University of Minnesota 
Libraries. Minnesota Landscape Arboretum.  261 pp. 
 
Kunlein, H.V. & N.J. Turner 1991.  Traditional plant 
foods of Canadian indigenous peoples.  Nutrition, 
botany, and use.  Food and Nutrition in History and 
Anthropology Volume 8.  Gordon and Breach 
Science Publishers.  632 pp. 
 
Leigh, M. (August) 1997.  Grow your own native 
landscape: A guide to identifying, propagating, and 
landscaping with western Washington native plants.  
Environmental Protection Agency, The Washington 
State Department of Ecology, and Washington State 
University Cooperative Extension. 

 

 

 
Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, & A.L. Nelson 1951.  
American wildlife and plants: A guide to wildlife food 
habits.  Dover Publications, Inc., New York, New 
York.  500 pp. 
 
Moore, M. 1979.  Medicinal plants of the mountain 
west.  Museum of New Mexico Press.  200 pp. 
 
Rose, R., C.E.C. Chachulski, & D. Haase 1998.  
Propagation of Pacific Northwest native plants.  
Oregon State University Press, Corvallis, Oregon. 
 
Sampson,  A.W. & B.S. Jespersen 1981.  California 
range brushlands and browse plants.  Division of 
Agricultural Sciences, University of California, 
Berkeley, California. 162 pp. 
 
Schlick, M.D. 1994.  Columbia River basketry.  Gift 
of the ancestors, gift of the Earth. University of 
Washington Press, Seattle and London.  232 pp. 
 
Schopmeyer, C.S. (Tech. Coord.) 1974.  Seeds of 
woody plants in the United States. Agriculture 
Handbook No. 450.  USDA, Forest Service, 
Washington, D.C. 
 
Stevens, M. & R. Vanbianchi 1993.  Restoring 
wetlands in Washington.  A guidebook for wetland 
restoration, planning and implementation.  
Washington State Department of Ecology.  
Publication #93-17. 
 
Turner, N.J., L.C. Thompson, M.T. Thompson & 
A.Z. York 1990.  Thompson ethnobotany: Knowledge 
and usage of plants by the Thompson Indians of 
British Columbia.  Royal British Columbia Museum 
Memoirs No. 3, Victoria, British Columbia, Canada 
 
Turner, N.J., J. Thomas, B.F. Carlson & R.T. Ogilvie 
1983.  Ethnobotany of the Nitinaht Indians of 
Vancouver Island.  British Columbia Provincial 
Museum, Occasional Paper No. 24.  165 pp. 
 
Turner, N.J.  & B.S. Efrat 1982.  Ethnobotany of the 
Hesquiat Indians of Vancouver Island.  B.C. 
Provincial Museum Cultural Recovery Paper No. 2.  
99 pp. 
 
Turner, N.J. 1978.  Food plant of British Columbia 
Indians. Part II. Interior peoples.  British Columbia 
Provincial Museum Handbook No. 36, Victoria, 
British Columbia, Canada. 
 
Turner, N.J. 1975.  Food plants of British Columbia 
Indians. Part I. Coastal Peoples.  British Columbia 

Provincial Museum Handbook No. 34, Victoria, 
British Columbia, Canada. 
 
Vanbianchi, R., M. Stevens, T. Sullivan & S. 
Hashisaki 1994.  A citizen's guide to wetland 
restoration.  U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 
Region 10.  71 pp. 
 
Prepared By 
Michelle Stevens 
Formerly USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
 
Dale C. Darris 
USDA, NRCS, Plant Materials Center, Corvallis, 
Oregon 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
c/o Plant Sciences Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 

Edited: 17jan01 jsp; 060818 jsp 
 
For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or Conservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

 

The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national origin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 

To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 

Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation 
Service.  
 

 

 

