SWAMP MILKWEED 

Asclepias incarnata L. 

Plant Symbol = ASIN 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS, Norman A. Berg National 
Plant Materials Center, Beltsville, MD  

 

Jennifer Anderson.  IA, Scott Co., Davenport, Nahant Marsh.  January 
2, 2002 

Alternate Names 
Rose milkweed 
Pleurisy Root 
White Indian hemp 
Warning: Swamp milkweed may be toxic when taken 
internally without sufficient preparation. 

Uses 
Conservation: Swamp milkweed is a native, colonizing, 
perennial wildflower useful for wetland rehabilitation. It 
is a good component of a wildlife seed mixture when 
seeded with native grasses and wildflowers. It prefers 
moisture retentive to damp soils in full sun to partial 
shade. 
Wildlife: Swamp milkweed is a favored food of monarch 
butterfly (Danaus plexippus) larva (shown in the picture 
above). Swamp milkweed is also an important food 
source for the queen butterfly (Danaus glippus) larva. 
Various other butterflies and hummingbirds consume 
nectar from the flowers.   
 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

Ethnobotanical: The Chippewa and Iroquois have used an 
infusion of the roots externally to strengthen the body and 
heal babies’ navels. The Iroquois and Meskwaki have also 
used a decoction of the roots and/or aerial portions of the 
plant as an emetic, diuretic, and anthelmintic (de-
worming agent). The common name, Pleurisy Root, 
comes from its once common use to treat lung problems.  
Swamp milkweed is toxic when taken in large doses.  The 
tough stringy stem fibers have been used to make twine, 
rope and rough textiles.  
The downy parachutes (comas) that are attached to each 
seed are six times more buoyant that cork and five times 
warmer than wool. Large quantities of milkweed were 
grown for use as stuffing in pillows and lifejackets during 
World War II.   
Landscape: Swamp milkweed is a tall plant with fragrant, 
showy clusters of pink and light purple flowers. It does 
well in landscape plantings with moist soil and in 
plantings near bodies of water. Unlike many ornamentals, 
swamp milkweed tolerates heavy clay soils and is very 
deer-resistant. It is a more cultivated alternative to 
common milkweed that is also attractive to egg-laying 
Monarchs.   
Livestock: The bitter leaves of swamp milkweed do not 
appeal to livestock; sheep are especially susceptible to the 
poisonous compounds in swamp milkweed, and sheep 
fatalities have been reported after consuming the plant. 

Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Description and Adaptation 

Swamp milkweed distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database. 
 

 

 
 

 

Description: Swamp milkweed is a native, perennial, 
wildflower growing three to six feet tall. It gets its 
common name from its white sap, although it has less sap 
than many of its relatives. The genus was named in honor 
of Aesculapius, Greek god of medicine, undoubtedly 
because some species have long been used to treat a 
variety of ailments. The Latin species name means flesh-
colored.  It has long, narrow, lance-shaped leaves that 
progress in pairs up the stem. Bright pink, white and 
purple clusters of flowers appear in summer at the tops of 
the stems. In the fall, blooms give way to distinctive tear-
shaped five-inch seed pods that are green when unripe, 
but harden to brown. The individual seeds are attached to 
fluffy hairs that allow the seeds to drift on the wind. 
Swamp milkweed also spreads through rhizomes (roots 
that grow horizontally from the original plant).  
Adaptation and distribution: Swamp milkweed is widely 
distributed across the U.S. and Canada from Quebec and 
Maine south to Florida and Texas and west to Nevada and 
Idaho. It prefers neutral to slightly acidic soil, although it 
will tolerate a pH up to 8.0. Its moisture requirements are 
high, and it is primarily found in moist habitats such as 
wet meadows, floodplains, riverbanks, pond shores, 
stream banks, wet woods, swamps, and marshes, although 
it will also grow in drier areas such as prairies, fields, and 
roadsides. Swamp milkweed needs full sun or partial 
shade to flourish. It is insect-pollinated and self-fertilizing 

Establishment 
Propagation by seeds:  Collect seeds in the fall, when the 
brown pods are dry and have begun to split. Crack the 
pods open completely allowing the seeds to dry for one to 
two weeks in paper bags.  Several weevil larvae prey on 
developing seeds, so look for signs of damage including 
small entry holes in the pod exuding latex.  Once they are 
dry, place the seeds into plastic bags filled with moist 
perlite or vermiculite and store them in a cold place, 
approximately 35 to 38 degrees Fahrenheit, for at least 4 
to 12 weeks (stratification). Good germination results 
have been reported without stratification by soaking the 
seed.  Soak the seed in hot water (190 degrees Fahrenheit) 
for 12 hours. Repeat this process two additional times for 
expected seed germination of 50%.  Seed can be placed in 
cold storage for up to three years.  
To grow plants, use germination trays with cells two 
inches wide and four inches deep. Fill the cells with a 
commercial seedling mixture or a mix of sphagnum peat 
moss and vermiculite and moisten well. Press the seed 
gently into the soil, three seed per cell, and cover with a 
very thin layer of soil. Keep the soil moist during 

 

 

germination by spraying or misting. Ambient 
temperatures should remain between 65 and 75 degrees 
Fahrenheit. Swamp milkweed seed requires light for 
germination. Germination is poor at temperatures higher 
than 85 degrees Fahrenheit. Seedlings should not be 
transplanted until they have at least one set of true leaves. 
Allow 4 to 8 weeks inside growing time for seedlings 
before moving to a cold frame or transplanting outside.  
Plants can be moved outside once the danger of frost has 
passed.   

Management 
Swamp milkweed spreads through rhizomes; established 
plants can be divided in late spring. Swamp milkweed is a 
relatively long-lived (and slow-growing) herbaceous 
perennial. 

Pests and Potential Problems 
Swamp milkweed attracts the orange milkweed aphid. If 
plants begin to look unhealthy, spray them with a soap 
solution or high-pressure blasts of water.   

Environmental Concerns 
None at this time. 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials  
The cultivars ‘Ice Ballet’ and ‘Cinderella’ can be found at 
many native plant nurseries. 

Prepared By  
Samantha Kirk and Shawn Belt, USDA-NRCS, Norman 
A. Berg National Plant Materials Center, Beltsville, MD. 
Citation 
Kirk, S. and Belt, S. 2011.  Plant fact sheet for swamp 
milkweed (Asclepias incarnata). USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Norman A. Berg 
National Plant Materials Center.  Beltsville, MD 20705. 

Published April, 2011 
 
Edited: 07Feb2011 SMK, 15Feb2011 SVB, 21Apr JW, 
25Apr RG 

For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or Conservation District 
<http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the PLANTS Web site 
<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials Program Web 
site <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

