TEXAS INDIAN 

MALLOW  

Abutilon fruticosum Guill. & Perr.  

Plant Symbol = ABFR3 

Contributed by: USDA – NRCS James E. ”Bud” Smith 
Plant Materials Center, Knox City, Texas  

Photo Courtesy: USDA NRCS James E. “Bud” Smith 
Plant Materials Center 
 
Alternate Names  
Pelotazo, sweet Indian mallow, Indian mallow  
  
Uses  
Texas Indian mallow a native perennial subshrub forb 
grows in dry areas on cliffs, slopes, limestone outcrops, 
prairies and in open woods and chaparral.  Plants are 
browsed by deer, sheep and goats and are quickly 
eliminated from grazed rangelands.  Seeds are eaten by 
bobwhite quail and mourning doves, and the plants 
provide cover for wildlife.  It has potential to enhance 
water quality and improve range condition with proper 
management.  Indian mallow is drought-tolerant and 
suitable for xeriscaping.  The conspicuous flower attracts 
birds, butterflies and larval plant food for several species 
of skipper butterflies.   
  
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
  

 
 

 

 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

Description and Adaptation  
Mallow Family (Malvaceae).  Texas Indian mallow an 
upright warm-season, hairy perennial subshrub forb 
reaches .3 to 1.8 meters (1 to 6 feet) , more commonly .6 
to .9 meters (2 to 3 feet high), the stem unbranched to 
much branched.  Leaves 10 centimeters (4 inches) long, 
alternate, short-stalked; blade thickish, gray in color with 
fine, star-shaped hairs, heart-shaped at base, sharply 
pointed at tip, the margins irregularly toothed.  Upper 
leaves much smaller.  Flowers are conspicuous at 1.9 to 
2.54 centimeters (¾ to 1 inch) across; 5 petals, pale 
orange-yellow; stamens numerous; blooms from June to 
October; 5 to 9 hairy carpels, two or more seeds in each 
carpel.  Found in dry, mostly calcareous soils of prairies, 
chaparral and in open woodlands, and on rocky cliffs and 
slopes from Arkansas, Oklahoma to Texas.      
 

 

Photo Courtesy: USDA NRCS James E. “Bud” Smith 
Plant Materials Center 
 
Establishment  
Texas Indian mallow should be seeded early in the spring, 
either by broadcasting or with a grass drill equipped with 
a small seed box.  For best result seeds no deeper than ¼ 
to ½ inch on a firm well prepared seedbed using some 
type of carrier, such as sand, to enhance seed distribution.  
Texas Indian mallow could be a valuable component if 
included in a grass/forb mix for pasture and rangeland.    
  
Seed production of Texas Indian mallow is achieved at 
the NRCS James E. “Bud” Smith Plant Materials Center 
in Knox City, Texas by seeding at a rate of 2.0 Pure Live 
Seed (PLS) pound per acre.  The Plant Materials Center 
seeds in the spring after the last frost with a two row 
cotton planter equipped with a Planet Jr. planter 
attachment.    
  
 

 

 

 

Management  
Texas Indian mallow will require grazing management to 
maintain plant vigor and persistence.  Plants have 
reported to prefer full or part sun exposure and not full 
shade.  If used for landscaping remove the previous years’ 
growth prior to spring growth. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems  
During evaluation and subsequent seed production at the 
James E. “Bud“ Smith Plant Materials Center near Knox 
City, Texas, no serious pests or diseases were observed.  
  
Environmental Concerns  
Texas Indian mallow does not pose any known negative 
concerns to the environment.     
  
Seeds and Plant Production  
Seed can be harvested with a standard combine and run 
through a hammer mill then cleaned with a fanning mill.  
Seed of Texas Indian mallow is small with 136,900 seeds 
per pound.     
  
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
There are currently no cultivars of Texas Indian mallow 
in seed commercial industry.  
  
Prepared By and Species Coordinator:   
Rudy G. Esquivel  
USDA – NRCS  
James E. “Bud” Smith Plant Materials Center  
Knox City, Texas  
  
Citiation: 
Esquivel, R. 2008. Plant Fact Sheet for Texas Indian 
mallow (Abutilon fruticosum. USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, James E. “Bud” Smith Plant 
Materials Center, Knox City, Texas 79529. 
 
 Published:  February 2008 
 
Edited: 14Jan08 rtc; 06Jun11bc 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

