SPLITBEARD 
BLUESTEM 

Andropogon ternarius Michx. 

Plant Symbol = ANTE2 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS East Texas Plant Materials 
Center 

 Melinda Brakie, East Texas Plant Materials Center  

  

Alternative Names 
 Some alternate names include: silvery beardgrass, split 
bluestem, and feather bluestem.  
 
Uses  
Livestock: Splitbeard bluestem is readily grazed by cattle 
in spring shortly after growth starts. If used as winter 
forage, cattle should be fed a protein supplement.  
 
Ornamental Landscaping: Because of its silvery, fluffy 
seedhead, splitbeard bluestem is used as an ornamental in 
native landscapes.  
 
Erosion Control: Splitbeard bluestem grows in poor or 
sandy soils.  
 
Wildlife: Birds and mammals utilize this grass for cover.  
 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
 
Description and Adaptation  
Splitbeard bluestem is a warm season, native, perennial 
bunchgrass. This grass is a member of the 
Andropogoneae tribe of grasses. Splitbeard bluestem 
grows to mature height of 0.7 to 1.2 meters tall (2 to 4 
feet). The upper half to 2/3 of the plant is branching in 
appearance. The stems are usually long, slender, and 
erect. They are often purplish to reddish green with green 
upper sheaths. The flat leaves are 20-45 cm long (8-18 
inches) and 2-4 mm wide (1/16-5/32 inches). Both the 
leaves and sheaths are often densely hairy and have a 
waxy silver appearance. The inflorescence has three to six 
pairs of racemes about 2 inches long with a white tuft at 
the base. The seedhead is a showy silvery – white that 
contrasts with the green foliage and stems of the plant. 
Splitbeard bluestem begins growing in April and 
continues through the summer. The plant produces seed 
from September to November.  
 

 

Distribution of Andropogon ternarius Michx. from PLANTS database 
 
Splitbeard bluestem is distributed from Delaware to 
Kentucky and Kansas and south to Florida and Texas. It is 
especially wide spread in the eastern half of Texas. This 
plant grows on medium and coarse textured soils with a 
pH ranging from 4 to 7.5. Splitbeard bluestem prefers 
open woods or woodland pastures on sandy soils. This 
grass is moderately shade tolerant, but seldom dominates 
a plant community.  

 
 

 

 

 

Establishment  
The seed should be planted in late winter as a dormant 
seeding. Plant the seeds at a depth of ¼ to ¾ inch using a 
seeding rate of 10 to 12 pounds pure live seed/acre.  
 
Management  
It is not recommended to include splitbeard bluestem in a 
seed mix with cool season species. This grass is not 
common enough to be a key management species. 
Splitbeard bluestem is grazed by cattle in the spring after 
growth starts. However, they ignore splitbeard bluestem 
as it matures during the growing season.  A stubble height 
of at least 6” is recommended when mowing or grazing. It 
will withstand periodic controlled burning. However, 
annual burning followed by grazing tends to eventually 
eliminate this species from the site’s plant community.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems  
Splitbeard bluestem has no known pests or problems.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
There are no known cultivars available; however common 
seed and container plants are readily available from a 
number of growers, wholesalers, and retailers of native 
seed.  
 
Prepared By:  
Melinda Brakie, USDA NRCS East Texas Plant Materials 
Center, Nacogdoches, Texas  
 
Species Coordinator:  
Melinda Brakie, USDA NRCS East Texas Plant Materials 
Center, Nacogdoches, Texas  

Citation 
Brakie, M. 2007. Plant fact sheet for splitbeard bluestem 
Andropogon ternarius Michx. USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, East Texas Plant Materials Center, 
Nacodoches, TX  75964. 

Edited 091207 jsp; 12092011mb 

Published September 2007 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

 

.

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

