SITKA ALDER  

Alnus viridis (Chaix) DC. ssp. 

sinuata (Regel) A. Löve & D. Löve  

Plant Symbol = ALVIS 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, Oregon

 

1  Susan McDougall @ USDA-NRCS PLANTS 
Database 
 
Alternate names  
Synonyms include Alnus sinuata, Alnus sitchensis, 
and Alnus crispa subsp. sinuata.  Other names 
include green alder, mountain alder, slide alder, and 
wavy-leaf alder.  
  
Uses  
Sitka alder is a valuable species for stabilizing 
drastically disturbed, nutrient poor sites such as 
eroded streambanks, landslide chutes, steep rocky 
slopes, areas of flood deposition and scour, and 
exposed mineral soils following glacial retreat, 
avalanches, and massive soil slumping.  It is also 
suitable for reclaiming acid, coal, and copper mine 
spoils and other soil enriching, revegetation efforts 
where a nitrogen fixing shrub (via bacteria in its root 
nodules) is desired.  At the proper densities, the 
species may also be useful in improving forest site 
productivity as a companion or nurse shrub in young 
conifer plantations.    
  
The palatability of Sitka alder is considered poor and 
forage value low for most ungulates, but others 
report that it is one of the most palatable of the 
native alders, especially for sheep. Moose, elk, and 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

certain deer will browse young shoots, leaves, or 
twigs, as will rabbits, snowshoe hares, and squirrels. 
The seeds, buds, or catkins are an important source 
of food in winter for numerous song and game birds. 
Beavers eat the bark and use the stems to build 
lodges and dams. Thickets provide thermal and 
hiding cover for big game and other wildlife, as well 
as nesting habitat for many small birds.  
  
Native Americans used the bark and its extracts to 
make a red-brown dye, cure several internal 
ailments, and treat skin wounds, itching, and 
swelling, including poison oak.  Leaves and roots 
were used medicinally as well. The wood was 
preferred by some tribes for smoking salmon, 
woodworking, and making bows, baskets, and 
snowshoes.  
  
Description  
Sitka alder is a deciduous shrub or small tree that 
grows to height of 3 to 20 ft, occasionally taller.  
The form is upright, multi-stemmed, and freely 
branching at the base with a rounded crown. Male 
flowers are in the form of long catkins that begin 
opening in late winter. Found separately on the same 
plant are the female flowers which are cone-like 
(short catkins called strobiles) and bloom in early 
spring when the leaves appear. The seeds are winged 
nutlets that mature in autumn or early winter within 
the egg shaped woody cones.  The leaves are broadly 
oval, 1 to 5 in. long, shiny above, wavy and finely 
toothed on the margins, and slightly scented and 
sticky beneath when young.  Nodules containing 
nitrogen fixing bacteria form on the strong fibrous 
roots.  The bark is smooth and grey. Twigs form a 
zigzag branch pattern.    
  
Status  
Please consult the Plants Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as state noxious and wetland 
indicator values.  
  
Adaptation  
Sitka alder is a pioneer species that prefers full sun 
to partial shade and soils that range from mineral to 
rich, humus covered substrates, acid to neutral pH 
(3.8 to 7.5), and coarse to medium texture (gravelly, 

 
 

 

 

sandy, silty, loamy).  However, it will tolerate moist 
clay soils and sites that are nutritionally poor.  This 
species prefers moderate to good drainage. It is less 
tolerant to flooding and poor drainage than red alder.  
Plants resprout from the crown after fire. 
 
Distribution- Sitka alder occurs naturally from 
central Alaska south to northern California and east 
to Alberta, northwest Wyoming, and western 
Montana. The elevation range is sea-level to 9000 ft 
in the mountains.  Habitat includes moist montane 
woods, rocky or sandy coastlines and talus slopes, 
streambanks, lakeshores, and the north face of rocky 
outcrops.    
 
Limitations or environmental concerns  
Sitka alder is host to a number of insect pests 
including root weevils, flea beetles, leaf rollers, 
borers, sawflies, leaf minors, scales, and aphids. 
Pathogens include leaf spots, powdery mildew, alder 
top-kill, and stem cankers. Some of these diseases 
can show up in nursery stock.   The species readily 
volunteers into disturbed areas, making it potentially 
weedy and a competitor with valuable timber trees. 
Toxicity for this plant has not been reported.  
 
Establishment  
Sitka alder cannot be propagated by dormant 
hardwood cuttings but success may be possible with 
green stem cuttings treated with 2000 ppm IBA 
(indole-butyric acid) plus a rooting powder and 
placed in a mist bench with bottom heat. 

dry conditions. Stored seed is often dormant and 
requires 14 days to 3 months of prechilling (cold 
moist stratification) at 34 to 38°F, or fall sowing. 
Seed can be surface sown or covered with a very 
thin layer of soil, potting media, or mulch.  Seedling 
establishment can benefit from the inoculation of 
roots with appropriate strains of Frankia bacteria (to 
stimulate nodule formation) and ectomychor-rhizal 
fungi. Fall planting is best along with the use of 
mulch and protection from animals.  
  
Improved cultivars and selected materials (and 
area of origin)  
For revegetation at low elevation in western Oregon 
and Washington, the Plant Materials Center in 
Corvallis, OR, released Skamania Germplasm, a 
selected class pre-variety from Skamania Co., WA. 
Studies in British Columbia showed clear 
geographic patterns in frost hardiness, growth, and 
other traits that related to latitude and distance from 
the Coast.  This and other work suggests that for 
land rehabilitation, material originating from the 
same region and similar habitat should be favored.    
  
Prepared by  
Dale Darris and Pete Gonzalves, USDA NRCS Plant 
Materials Center, Corvallis, Oregon.  
  
Species coordinator  
Dale Darris, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, Oregon.  
 

Published October, 2009 

Edited: [e.g., 08Sep2009 rg, 08Sep2009 jfh; 17Sep2009 
jfe] 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov.

2  Photo by dale Darris 
 
 Propagation from seed is reliable. Cones are 
collected in fall when they turn brown and begin to 
open. Once the seed is extracted it can be sown 
immediately without treatment or stored under cool, 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

