 

 

 

 

  Plant Fact Sheet

KREMMLING 
MILKVETCH 

Astragalus osterhoutii      

 M.E. Jones 

Plant Symbol = ASOS 

Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Colorado Plant Materials 
Program 

 

Figure1:  Kremmling milkvetch, (Astragalus osterhoutii).  Photo 
USFWS, Alicia Langton July 2010. 

Alternative Names 
Common Alternate Names:  Osterhout’s milkvetch 
 
Warning:  Kremmling milkvetch is a selenium 
accumulator and may cause selenium poisoning. 

 

 

 

 
Uses 
The flowers are white and showy, attracting a variety of 
pollinators. Primary pollinators include Apis mellifera, 
Bombus sp., and Osmia sp.  Kremmling milkvetch is of 
economic significance as an indicator of selenium and as 
a potentially toxic plant in rangelands.   

Status 
Kremmling milkvetch was listed as “endangered” under 
the Endangered Species Act in 1989.  
 
The NatureServe conservation status rank, an 
international effort which rank species on their “global” 
status, denotes Kremmling milkvetch as G1/S1- critically 
imperiled globally and statewide, because of  its extreme 
rarity, it is especially vulnerable to extinction.   
 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Description and Adaptation 
Pea family (Fabaceae).  Kremmling milkvetch, is a 
relatively tall plant with linear leaflets and several bright 
green stems reaching up to 40 inches (100 centimeters) in 
height. There are 12—25 white flowers, 1 in. (2.4 cm) 
long, per inflorescence, each ultimately with stipitate 
pendulous pods, 1.8 in. (4.5 cm) long.  Astragalus 
pattersonii  and A. bisulcatus  are similar species also 
with a relatively tall growth form.  The three species may 
be separated as follows: Kremmling milkvetch is 
distinguished from A. pattersonii by its long, pendulous 
fruits that are laterally compressed, from A. bisulcatus by 
its large, white flowers, and from both by its lime-green, 
linear leaflets. 
 
Kremmling milkvetch is adapted to grow on highly 
seleniferous, grayish-brown clay soils derived from shales 
of Niobrara, Pierre, and Troublesome formations.  
Kremmling milkvetch occurs on shaley slopes at middle 
elevations ranging from 7,400 – 7,900 feet (2,256 – 2,408 
meters) within the sagebrush parks eco-region with an 
average annual precipitation of 10-16 inches.  
 
Habitat:  
Kremmling milkvetch occurs on moderate slopes, on 
white shale outcrops of the Niobrara, Pierre, and 
Troublesome Formations in northern Grand County, 
Colorado. The chaparral/shrubland habitat includes the 
following common plant associates: big sagebrush 
(Artemesia tridentata), yellow rabbitbrush 

(Chrysothamnus viscidiflorus), broom snakeweed 
(Gutierrezia sarothrae), winterfat (Krascheninnikovia 
lanata), spiny phlox (Phlox hoodii), shortstem buckwheat 
(Eriogonum brevicaule), and western wheatgrass 
(Pascopyrum smithii).   
 

 

Figure 2: Kremmling milkvetch distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS 
Database. 

Kremmling milkvetch is known to be endemic only to a 
localized area near the town of Kremmling, in Middle 
Park, Colorado.  The current known global distribution 
includes five small and scattered populations within an 
eight-mile radius, occupying an estimated 800 acres of 
habitat near the town of Kremmling in Middle Park, 
Colorado. 

For updated distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 

Establishment 
Seeds of Kremmling milkvetch exhibit physical dormancy 
requiring scarification in order to germinate.  Kremmling 
milkvetch may be mycorrhizaland , a symbiotic 
dinitrogen fixer with Rhizobium bacteria, as nearly all 
Astragalus species.  Kremmling milkvetch plants produce 
viable seeds by both outcrossing and self-pollination, with 
higher fruit set from self-pollination.  Low fecundity is 
commonly found in the Astragalus genus, many species 
persist in small, highly restricted populations which are 
endemic to particular geologic formations. 
 

 

Management 
Kremmling milkvetch is threatened by commercial, 
residential, and agricultural property development, and 
the associated new utility installations and access roads, 
reservoir operations and expansion, off-highway vehicle 
recreation, oil and gas exploration, and livestock grazing.  
A loss of  pollinators and their habitat due to development 
is also a threat to this species. 

Pests and Potential Problems 
Blister beetles (Epicauta pennsylvanica) have been noted 
feeding en masse on the flowers of Kremmling milkvetch, 
particularly affecting populations occuring along Muddy 
Creek.  Also, larval bruchine beetles of the genus 
Acanthoscelides may feed upon Kremmling milkvetch 
seeds, as evidenced by pin-sized emergence holes on the 
seed pods. 

Environmental Concerns 
Kremmling milkvetch is known to accumulate selenium 
at toxic levels in its foliage and is known to be a selenium 
indicator plant.  Selenium causes the plant to emit an 
unpleasant pungent odor of garlic or sulfur (a “rotten egg” 
smell), and at high levels is known to be toxic to grazing 
animals.    
 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
None at this time. 
 
Prepared By:   
Christine Taliga, Plant Materials Specialist, USDA NRCS 
Colorado State Office, Denver, Colorado. 
 
Citation 
Taliga, Christine E., 2012. Plant Fact Sheet for 
Kremmling milkvetch (Astragalus osterhoutii). USDA-
Natural Resources Conservation Service, Colorado State 
Office. Denver, CO 80225-0426. 
 
Published September 2012 
Edited: 19Sep2012jab, 20Sep2012cga 
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov.

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

