BROOMSEDGE 

BLUESTEM 

ANDROPOGON 
VIRGINICUS L.  

Plant Symbol = ANVI2 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS East Texas Plant Materials 
Center  

  
  Melinda Brakie, USDA NRCS East Texas Plant Materials Center  

Alternate Names 
broomsedge, yellowsedge bluestem, Virginia bluestem, 
whiskey grass     

Uses 
Livestock: Broomsedge bluestem is not considered 
important cattle forage.  It provides grazing in spring and 
early summer. However, nutritional quality and 
palatability quickly decrease as the summer progresses.    
 
Wildlife: Small birds utilize the seed in winter when other 
food supplies are limited. Broomsedge bluestem provides 
cover for ground nesting birds such as quail and turkeys.  

 

Plant Fact Sheet

It is a larval host for the Zabulon Skipper butterfly 
(Poanes zabulon).   
  
Ornamental: Broomsedge bluestem is used as an 
ornamental plant.  It is recommended for golf courses and 
residential landscaping because it requires low amounts of 
water.  In the fall, the foliage turns a reddish orange and 
retains this color during winter dormancy, thereby adding 
color to the winter landscape.   
  
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site 
(http://plants.usda.gov ) and your State Department of 
Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g. 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description and Adaptation 
Broomsedge bluestem is a native warm season perennial 
bunchgrass that grows 2 to 4 feet tall.  The leaves are flat 
to partly folded 10 to 15 inches long and approximately 
1/8 inch wide.  The fringed ligule is 1/16 inch long.  The 
flattened basal leaf sheaths are colorless or yellow. The 
rest of the plant is a pale greenish yellow. Broomsedge 
bluestem produces many seeds on the upper half of the 
plant that are distributed by the wind.  At a distance the 
inflorescence may appear silvery in the sunlight. 
 
Broomsedge bluestem grows where average rainfall is 
greater than 25 inches.   It is found throughout the eastern 
portion of the United States. The grass is found in open 
areas such as abandoned fields, overgrazed pastures, cut-
over timber sites, and rights of way.   Broomsedge grows 
on a wide variety of soils, preferring loose, sandy, moist 
sites with low fertility and is an indicator of low 
phosphorus soils. It also is a shallow rooted plant. 
 
Distribution: Please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment  
Broomsedge bluestem can be established by direct 
seeding or transplanting.  Direct seeding is the preferred 
method of establishing a broomsedge bluestem stand. 
Prepare a firm, weed free seedbed by discing and 
cultipacking.  The site may be prepared by treating the 
planting area in the spring with a nonselective herbicide 
such as glyphosate to kill existing vegetation then using a 
no-till type drill to plant.  
 
The best time to plant broomsedge bluestem seeds is in 
the spring when soil temperature is at least 55°F or 
greater.  The seed should be planted no more than ¼ inch 

 
 

 

deep. Broomsedge bluestem seeds germinate well and 
readily begin growing on exposed soil.  Two methods for 
planting the seed are drilling and broadcast planting.  A 
drill is the preferred method due to proper seed placement 
and spacing.  The drill should be capable of planting light, 
fluffy seed at a planting rate of 8 pounds of pure live seed 
(PLS) per acre.  When broadcast planting the seed, 
increase the planting rate to 12 PLS per acre.  It will be 
necessary to add a carrier material to the broomsedge 
bluestem seed when broadcast planting is done. Carriers 
include rice hulls, sand, or sawdust.  Without an 
accompanying carrier material, the broomsedge bluestem 
seed will not flow well through the broadcaster and be 
unevenly distributed in the field. After broadcast planting, 
run a cultipacker or roller over the planting to ensure seed 
to soil contact.   
  
Broomsedge seedlings grow quickly. In a North Carolina 
study, first-year seedlings averaged five inches in height.  
One and two year old plants averaged 40 inches in height 
and 3 inches in basal circumference (Keever, 1950).  Seed 
production begins when plants reach two to three years of 
age.  
  
Transplants of broomsedge bluestem are best used for 
small areas and high visibility sites.  Transplants are 
usually more costly than direct seeding.  Professional 
installations may cost between $1.00 per square foot for 
small plants and up to $10.00 per square foot for gallon 
pots. To produce transplants, divide larger plant crowns 
into smaller plants.  Divide plant crowns so that each 
small plant includes healthy, viable stems.  The best time 
for transplanting is in the spring. Dig a hole just large 
enough to accommodate plant roots without bunching, 
and then fill in around the plant with soil.  After planting, 
water the transplants so they will have adequate moisture 
and the soil will settle around the roots.  Prevent weed 
seed germination by applying a pre-emergent herbicide or 
mulch, after planting.  
  
Management  
Native grasses grow slowly and require two to three years 
to fully establish.  Mowing is an effective method for 
controlling weeds.  Mow above the tops of the 
broomsedge bluestem to reduce weed competition.  
Mowing only the tops keeps from covering up the small 
grass seedlings.   
  
Weeds can also be controlled by selective herbicides. 
Imazapic herbicides will control broadleaf weeds and is 
labeled for use on most warm season grasses. Apply 
imazapic herbicides in the spring using a boom sprayer 
after the broadleaf weeds have begun growing.  
  
In certain situations, broomsedge bluestem is considered a 
pasture weed.  It increases in plant numbers as more 
desirable vegetation is selectively grazed by livestock.  If 
left uncontrolled, broomsedge bluestem can become the 
dominant grass in abused, overgrazed range and pastures.  

 

 

Avoid overgrazing of desirable grasses by managing the 
number of animals, the duration of their grazing, and 
amount of herbage that is removed from the pasture.  Do 
not rely on calendar days to determine the number of days 
for animals to graze a pasture, instead schedule grazing 
based on plant growth of key species and available forage.  
If warm season grasses are the desirable species, remove 
grazing animals when the grasses have 6 to 8 inches of 
stubble height remaining.  Contact your local USDA-
NRCS field office for assistance in planning a prescribed 
grazing plan.    
  
Vegetative growth of broomsedge bluestem begins in 
early spring.  To reduce the amount of broomsedge 
bluestem in a pasture, heavily graze it in early spring 
when the grass is most palatable and then defer grazing 
for 60 to 90 days.  Increase the soil fertility by adding 
nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium based upon soil tests 
and fertilizer recommendations. Fertilizing the desirable 
species will help them compete successfully with the 
broomsedge.  
  
Pests and Potential Problems  
On infertile soils, broomsedge is a long-lived competitor.  
Broomsedge bluestem has allelopathic chemicals which 
adversely affected other plants (Rice, 1972).  
   
Environmental Concerns  
Broomsedge bluestem was inadvertently introduced to the 
Hawaiian Islands in 1932.  It is considered noxious there 
because it invades native Hawaiian plant communities 
and alters the fire and hydrology regimes (Diggs, et al., 
2006).  
  
Control 
By itself, prescribed burning has little detrimental effect 
on broomsedge bluestem and is not an effective means of 
control.  The aboveground biomass is removed; in 
response, the plant quickly begins new vegetative growth 
after a burn.  However, the new vegetative growth can be 
treated with herbicides.  
  
Glyphosate herbicides are an effective chemicals to use 
for control of broomsedge bluestem. Glyphosate 
herbicides are non-selective.  Broadcast spraying of  a 
glyphosate herbicide will result in killing both 
broomsedge bluestem and desirable vegetation. 
Therefore, broadcast spraying is not recommended for 
established stands of desirable vegetation.  If a complete 
canopy kill is the objective, apply the herbicide using a 
boom sprayer.  Apply the herbicide when the plants are 
actively growing.  A follow-up application may be 
needed.  
  
Selective application of glyphosate, such as wicking or 
spot treatment is recommended in established pastures.  
When using a wick, raise it above the desired vegetation 
and sweep the top of the broomsedge bluestem.  If the 
treatment site is smaller with isolated broomsedge 

 

 

colonies, a backpack sprayer is a feasible option to apply 
herbicide.  Make herbicide applications when the 
broomsedge bluestem plants are actively growing.   
  
For all chemical control methods, always read and follow 
label and safety instructions.  Consult your extension 
weed specialist or county agent for recommended 
herbicides.  Control measures appear in this document 
only to provide specific information.  USDA NRCS does 
not guarantee or warranty the products and control 
methods named, and other products may be equally 
effective.  
  
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
Currently, the cultivar ‘Silver Beauty’ is commercially 
available.  Locally harvested material may be available 
from local seed dealers.  
  
Prepared By 
Melinda Brakie, USDA NRCS East Texas Plant Materials 
Center, Nacogdoches, Texas  
  
Species Coordinator 
R. Alan Shadow, USDA NRCS East Texas Plant 
Materials Center  
 
References:   
Diggs, G.M., B. Lipscomb, M. Reed, et al. 2006. 
Illustrated Flora of East Texas Vol.1. Botanical Research 
Institute of Texas, Fort Worth, Texas.  
  
Keever, C. 1950. Causes of succession on old fields of the 
Piedmont, North Carolina. Ecological Monographs. 20 
(3):229-250.  
  
Rice, E.L. 1972. Allelopathic effects of Andropogon 
virginicus and its persistence in old fields. Amer. J. Bot. 
59:752-755.  
   
Edited:  22Sep09 mws 

Published: September 2009 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

