 

 

 

  Plant Fact Sheet

SHOWY MILKWEED 

Asclepias speciosa Torr. 

Plant Symbol = ASSP 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials 
Center, Corvallis, OR, and Great Basin Plant Materials 
Center, Fallon, NV 

Photo by E. Eldredge, NRCS, Fallon, NV, 2011. 

 

Alternative Names 
Alternate Common Names: showy butterfly weed, creek 
milkweed, Greek milkweed 
Alternate Scientific Names: Asclepias giffordii Eastw., 
Asclepias douglasii Hook. 

Warning: Without sufficient preparation, milkweed 
can be toxic when taken internally. 

Uses 
Pollinators: The abundant nectar of milkweed flowers 
attracts hummingbirds, butterflies, honey bees, native 
bees, and other beneficial insects.  Accordingly, this is a 
wonderful horticultural plant for butterfly gardens, 
borders, meadows, or native plant landscaping.  Milkweed 
plants (Asclepias spp.) are the only larval host for 
monarch butterflies (Danaus plexippus).  It is important to 
have large, dense clumps of milkweeds for monarch 
caterpillars.  Monarch, queen (Danaus gilippus) and 
viceroy butterflies (Limenitis archippus) get chemicals 
from the milkweed plant that make them distasteful to 
predators, and all have similar orange and black patterns 
to warn predators. 

Restoration: Showy milkweed's tough, extensive root 
system, drought tolerance, and minimal nutrient 

requirements make it a good species for stabilizing and 
restoring degraded or disturbed sites. 
Ethnobotany: People have used milkweed plants for fiber, 
food, and medicine.  The young shoots, stems, flower 
buds, flowers, and immature fruits of showy milkweed 
were eaten raw or boiled as a vegetable by indigenous 
groups of North America.  The most common use for the 
plant among tribes of California was as cordage.  The 
sticky white sap was also made into a type of chewing 
gum by heating it until it became solid, and mixing it with 
salmon fat or deer grease. 
The sap of showy milkweed was used by some desert 
tribes to heal sores and cuts, and to cure warts and 
ringworm.  The ripe seeds were ground and made into a 
salve for sores.  Seeds were boiled and the liquid used to 
draw the venom from rattlesnake bites.  Tea made from 
the rhizomes was a remedy for measles or coughs.  It was 
also used as a wash to cure rheumatism.  The rhizomes, 
mashed with water, were used as a poultice to reduce 
swelling. 
Fiber: Stem fibers of milkweed are used by Native 
Americans to make course cloth, string, cords, and ropes.  
At Zuni, NM, the silky seed floss is spun into yarn and 
woven into a special fabric for dancers.  Hybrids of A. 
speciosa and A. syriaca are being tested for commercial 
seed floss production as a hypo-allergenic substitute for 
goose down. 
Toxicity: Milkweed contains toxic alkaloids and 
cardenolides, which can cause nausea and vomiting in 
low doses, and death in high doses.  Animals avoid 
milkweed if other forage is available. 

Status 
Showy milkweed is listed as a threatened species in Iowa.  
In most regions showy milkweed is considered a 
facultative species, meaning it is equally likely to occur in 
wetlands or non-wetlands.  Please consult the PLANTS 
Web site and your State Department of Natural Resources 
for this plant’s current status (e.g., threatened or 
endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland 
indicator values). 

Weediness 
Due to its vigorous vegetative growth, showy milkweed 
may become weedy and outcompete or displace other 
vegetation if not properly managed.  Please consult your 
local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service 
office, state natural resource office, or state agriculture 
department regarding its status and use.  Weed 
information is also available from the PLANTS Web site 
at http://plants.usda.gov. 

 

Description and Adaptation 
Showy milkweed is a member of the milkweed family 
Asclepiadaceae (now placed in Apocynaceae, the 
dogbane family).  Showy milkweed is a native herbaceous 
perennial from widespread rhizomes, which produce 
stems that grow to 1½ to 5 ft tall in summer.  The gray-
green leaves are opposite, 4 to 7 inches long, oval, and 
covered in velvety hairs.  Stems and foliage exude milky 
latex sap when cut.  Flowers are in loose clusters at the 
top of the stems and are rose-purple, aging to yellow.  
Individual Asclepias flowers look like crowns, with the 
corolla (petals) reflexed, and hoods above the corolla.  
Plants flower from May to September.  Thick seed pods 3 
to 5 inches long split down one side in fall to release 
reddish-brown, flat seeds.  Each seed has a tuft of white, 
silky hairs that allows them to be dispersed by wind. 
Showy milkweed grows in well-drained soil in full or 
nearly full sun, in pastures, meadows, forest clearings, 
untilled fields, roadsides, and ditch banks, from sea level 
to 6,250 ft.  For updated distribution, please consult the 
Plant Profile for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 

 
Showy milkweed distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database. 

Establishment 
Seed can be collected after pods have ripened.  Seeds do 
not store well, and should be sown in the fall, as seedlings 
are delicate and generally transplant poorly, and potted 
plants do not overwinter well.  Cold, moist stratification 
for up to three months may improve seed germination in 
showy milkweed. Showy milkweed has 70,000 to 100,000 
seeds per pound, so sowing at a rate of one pound pure 
live seed per acre will result in 1- 2 seeds per square foot. 
Propagation by rhizome cuttings is easy and reliable.  The 
cuttings should be dug when the plant is dormant 
(generally by October).  Each piece of rhizome should 
have at least one bud.  Plant the rhizomes 4 to 6 inches 
deep in late fall.  Irrigation the first year will improve 
survival.  Both seedlings and cuttings will usually bloom 
in the second year, although cuttings will occasionally 
bloom their first year. 

Management 
Milkweed stems die in winter, and new stems emerge in 
spring.  For fiber, old milkweed stems were collected by 
breaking them off at the ground after the leaves dried in 
fall.  Milkweed was burned in the fall by California 
Indian tribes to eliminate dead stems, stimulate flower 
and seed production, and stimulate new growth with tall, 
straight stems and long fibers in the following year. 

Pests and Potential Problems 
Insects besides butterflies that tolerate milkweed toxins 
include the large milkweed bug (Oncopeltus fasciatus), 
common milkweed bug (Lygaeus kalmii), red milkweed 
beetle (Tetraopes tetrophthalmus), blue milkweed beetle 
(Chrysochus cobaltinus), and some aphids (Aphis spp.).  
These insects can occasionally cause feeding damage. 

Environmental Concerns 
Milkweed plants are toxic to livestock, but animals will 
avoid them when other forage is available.  Milkweed 
should be excluded from hay or prepared feeds. 

Control 
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use it safely.  Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method. 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
Seeds and plants of showy milkweed are sometimes 
available commercially.  Seed from plants growing in 
your area will be best adapted to local conditions. 

Prepared By 
Annie Young-Mathews, Conservation Agronomist, USDA 
NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials Center, Oregon 
Eric Eldredge, Manager, USDA NRCS Great Basin Plant 
Materials Center, Fallon, Nevada 

Citation 
Young-Mathews, A., and E. Eldredge. 2012. Plant fact 
sheet for showy milkweed (Asclepias speciosa). USDA-
Natural Resources Conservation Service, Corvallis Plant 
Materials Center, OR and Great Basin Plant Materials 
Center, Fallon, NV. 
Published August 2012 
Edited: 15May2012 dcd; 25Jun2012jab; 29Aug2012 gm 
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

