BLACK MANGROVE 
Avicennia germinans (L.) L  

Plant Symbol = AVGE 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Golden Meadow, Louisiana 

 

Garret Thomassie, USDA NRCS  
Alternate Names 
Avicennia 
nitida  
 
Uses 
Erosion control: Black mangrove is valuable in restoring 
brackish and salt water marshes due to its ability to filter 
and trap sediments.  Mangrove forests, which include 
black mangrove, have a high capacity as a sink for excess 
nutrients and pollutants.  It also mixes well with other 
native plants to reduce wave energy.  
 
Wildlife: Black mangrove serves as nursery habitat for 
crustaceans and fish.  Mangrove detritus (dead leaves and 
twigs) in water feeds microorganisms that provide food 
for young marine life.  It is estimated that as much as 80% 
of the organic budget of bays in Florida came from the 
surrounding mangrove forests. Black mangrove serves as 
nesting habitat for many coastal birds including brown 
pelicans.  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description and Adaptation 
Black mangrove is a subtropical woody shrub that grows 
in salt marshes.  Mangroves are very hardy and have 
become adapted to harsh environments where water and 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

salinity levels fluctuate.  Pneumatophores, or breather 
roots, form a network that collects silt and debris, and 
controls erosion.  Pneumatophores are a major adaptation 
to the stresses of intertidal habitat.  They allow root 
respiration in anaerobic, waterlogged soils.  The 
pneumatophores are also excellent nursery areas for 
crustaceans in the marsh plant community.  The height of 
black mangrove in Louisiana varies from 4 to 9 feet.  In 
Florida, individual trees can reach 60 feet, but are usually 
much shorter.  Leaves are 1 to 5 inches long, elliptical, 
opposite, thick, leathery, dark green, glabrous (smooth) 
above, and grayish with a tight felt-like pubescence 
beneath.  Glands on the underside secrete salt.  Clusters of 
small sessile flowers with white petals, approximately ½ 
inch in diameter, are borne in the leaf axils and growing 
tips on the twigs.  The fruit are flat, approximately 1 inch 
long, dark green and glabrous beneath a velvety pericarp.  
The bark on the black mangrove is thick, dark brown or 
blackish, with rough irregular flattened scales.  Twigs are 
grayish in color and smooth, with enlargements at the 
joints.    
 
Black mangrove is adapted to sub-tropical and tropical 
coastal intertidal zones along the Gulf of Mexico.  The 
spatial distribution across the intertidal zone for black 
mangrove, red mangrove (Rhizophora mangle), and white 
mangrove (Laguncularia racemosa) suggests differential 
flooding tolerance among these species.  Black mangrove 
penetrates farthest inland into brackish water and farthest 
north of the mangrove species.  Black mangrove is able to 
regulate its internal salt concentration and grow in a wild 
range of salinities, but its ability to increase leaf area is 
limited under high salinity.  At Bay Champagne near 
Fourchon, Louisiana, three vegetation zones were 
delineated in a mangal/salt marsh community: a zone 
adjacent to the bay and dominated by black mangrove, an 
inland zone dominated by cordgrass (Spartina 
alterniflora), and a zone between the two containing both 
species.  
Black mangrove is a valuable component of the 
marsh ecosystem.  This plant is susceptible to freezing 
and the native range can be changed drastically by hard 
winters.   
 
Distribution: Black mangrove is native to the southern 
U.S., tropical America, and Africa.  Please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Establishment 
Black mangrove grows in the intertidal zone throughout 
the Gulf of Mexico.  It will establish in nature from seed 
that floats and can travel some distance on the tides.  Seed 
will germinate quickly and establish young seedlings in 

 
 

 

 

Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service office for more information.  Look in the phone 
book under “United States Government”.  The Natural 
Resources Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Department of Agriculture.” 
 
Prepared By 
Morris J Houck, USDA NRCS, Plant Materials Specialist, 
Alexandria, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
Richard H. Neill, USDA NRCS Golden Meadow Plant 
Materials Center, Galliano, Louisiana 

Citation 
Houck, M., Neill, R. 2009. Plant fact sheet for black 
mangrove (Avicennia germinans (L.) L.). USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Louisiana Plant 
Materials Center, Galliano, Louisiana  70354 
 
Published:  September 2009 
 
Edited: 18Sep09 jfh; 22Sep09 mws 
 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 

good habitat.  Mangrove communities will often 
reestablish by natural volunteer propagule recruitment if 
natural hydrologic patterns are restored.  
 
Black mangrove may be propagated in the nursery from 
wild collected seed.  Seed collected in the wild will not 
survive more than three to four weeks.  Freshly collected 
seed should be soaked in water, the pericarp removed and 
the seed planted into plastic pots with any commercial 
potting soil.  Various sizes of tubes and pots have been 
used with success.  Germination and rooting normally 
occurs within two weeks of planting.  Plants can be 
maintained in fresh water tanks that hold moisture at the 
bottom of the pots.  One to two year old seedlings (18 
inches tall) have been transplanted with great success to 
provide land stabilization and establish wildlife and 
marine habitats.  The greater the root mass (not root 
bound pots) the greater the chance of successful out 
planting.  The Florida Department of Natural Resources 
obtained excellent survival and growth by transplanting 
19 to 59 inches tall seedlings, with a rootball diameter 
equal to one-half the tree height.  Pruning seedlings just 
before or after transplanting enhances recovery and 
increases growth rate.  Plant the seedlings in areas where 
the tidal flow will cover and uncover the root collar. 
Various water depths promote extensive root systems, but 
seedlings do not become established until water depth is 
reduced to 2 inches or less.  Plantings in areas of high 
wave energy may have to be protected or anchored until 
the root system is capable of supporting the plant.   
 
Management 
There are no data on managing native black mangrove 
stands.  In the Gulf of Mexico the range of black 
mangrove is “managed” by the winter weather.   
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no known pests that could threaten black 
mangrove stands in the wild. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
Black mangrove is a valuable component of the intertidal 
ecosystem.  Loss of black mangrove is a concern as it is a 
woody species that persists and assists in habitat 
development and in breaking wave energy and it provides 
nesting habitat for birds. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
The USDA NRCS Plant Materials Centers have released 
one variety.  Pelican Germplasm black mangrove is a pre-
varietal release from the Golden Meadow Plant Materials 
Center, Galliano, Louisiana.  This germplasm was 
selected to provide a plant for soil conservation in 
brackish and salt water marshes. 
 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

