MAUI CHAFF FLOWER 
Achyranthes splendens Mart. Ex 

 
Contributed by: USDA/NRCS Hoolehua Plant Materials 
Center 

Moq. 

Plant Symbol = ACSP3 

 

Figure 1 Outplanting of A. splendens var. splendens at 
Upper Kaulana, Kahoolawe. Kim & Forest Starr, 
DEC2008 
 
Alternate Names:   
Ewa  hinahina;  round  chaff  flower;  round-leaved  chaff 
flower.   
 
Uses: 
Achyranthes  splendens  has  the  potential  for  ecosystem 
restoration,  re-vegetation  of  degraded  habitats,  and  to 
increase diversity in dry-land and coastal communities.   
Its silvery appearance makes it an excellent selection for 
xeriscape gardens and other dryland landscaping projects. 
 
Status 
Please  consult  the  PLANTS  Web  site  and  your  State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

status  (e.g.,  threatened  or  endangered  species,  state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
Achyranthes splendens var. rotunda is listed by the U.S. 
Federal Government as an Endangered Species. 
 
Description and Adaptation 
Achyranthes  splendens  is  a  small  shrub  2  to  6  feet  in 
height. The leaves are arranged opposite and are obovate 
to broadly elliptic or suborbicular in shape, ranging in size 
from ¾ to 4 ½ inches long and ½ to 2 ½ inches wide. The 
leaves are also covered with white hairs, especially on the 
lower  surface  giving  them  a  silvery  appearance.    Its 
flower  is  a  densely-congested  spike  with  a  silvery 
appearance as well and can measure from 1 to 9 ½ inches 
long. 
 
Achyranthes  splendens  is  an  endemic  shrub.  It  occurs 
naturally  at  low  elevations,  generally  from  sea  level  to 
100  feet,  in  open,  dry  areas.    It  is  known  to  survive 
plantings up to 1000 feet.  It is currently known to occur 
naturally  along  the  western  coast  of  Oahu,  on  the 
Kalaupapa  peninsula  on  Molokai,  near  Manele  and 
Maunalei Gulch on  Lanai, in West Maui, and near Kula 
on  East  Maui.  There  are  2  varieties  recognized  in  The 
Manual  of  the  Flowering  Plants  of  Hawaii  (Wagner 
1990); A. splendens var. rotundata, and A. splendens var. 
splendens. 
 
 
 

 

Achyranthes splendens distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS 
Database. 

For updated distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 

Establishment 
Achyranthes  splendens  will  propagate  easily  either  by 
seed or by vegetative cuttings.  Dibble tubes and a sterile 
planting medium with good drainage are recommended to 
start  propagules.    Cuttings  should  be  started  under  50% 
shade.  Seeds should be started in full sunlight and should 
germinate within 7-10 days.    Out-plant A. splendens in 
areas  where  it  can  enjoy  full  sunlight.  A.  splendens  will 
tolerate low fertility soils, but soil amendments based on 
soil  tests  will  benefit  any  planting.  When  out-planting 
seedlings,  moderate  moisture  should  be  provided  until 
plants  become  established.    This  could  take  at  least  1-2 
months. 
 
Management 
Achyranthes  splendens  is  well  adapted  to  low  rainfall 
areas and requires very little moisture, if any, once it has 
become established.  A. splendens  will  thrive  with  no to 
very little soil amendments.  It tolerates pruning and will 
recover easily from the occasional broken branch.  There 
have  been  instances  at  the  Hoolehua  PMC  where  the 
major stem had broken off and the remaining stump had 
re-grown completely. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no known pests or potential problems. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
Achyranthes  splendens  is  primarily  threatened  by  urban 
development.  Other threats include invasive alien plants, 
wildfires, introduced deer and cattle ranching. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
None. 
 
Prepared By: 
David Duvauchelle – Natural Resource Specialist 
 
Citation 
Duvauchelle, David P.L., 2010. Plant fact sheet for Maui 
chaff  flower  (Achyranthes  splendens).  USDA-Natural 
Resources  Conservation  Service,  Hoolehua  Plant 
Materials Center. Hoolehua, Hawaii 96729. 
 

Published:  October 2010 
 
Edited: [16Sep2010_dd;17Sep2010_jab  ] 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov>.

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

