 

 

PURPLE GIANT 

HYSSOP  

Agastache scrophulariifolia  

(Willd.) Kuntze  
Plant Symbol = AGSC 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS Cape May Plant Materials 
Center 

 

USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database / William S. Justice @ USDA-NRCS 
PLANTS Database 
 
Alternative Names  
Common Alternate Names:  
giant hyssop  
prairie hyssop 
 
Scientific Alternate Names: 
Hyssopus scrophulariifolia Willd. 
Agastache scrophulariifolia var. mollis (Fernald) A. 
Heller 
 
Uses 
Wildlife Use: Purple giant hyssop provides a nectar source 
for pollinators and is well suited for use in pollinator 
restoration habitat. Preliminary observation found that 
purple giant hyssop attracted 14 different species of 
Hymenoptera and Lepidoptera in Cape May, New Jersey. 
The halictid bee (Agapostemon virescens), leaf-cutter bee 
(Megachile mendica), and Megachile texana species were 
most frequently observed visiting the flower. Other bees 
known to frequent the flower are the European honey bee 
(Apis mellifera), black and gold bumble bee (Bombus 

 

 

 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

auricomus), and Bombus pensylvanicus. The flower also 
attracts goldfinches and hummingbirds.  
 
Ornamental  
Purple giant hyssop is a popular ornamental plant. The 
relatively large height of the plant makes it a good choice 
as a background against fencing.  
 
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description and Adaptation 
Description: Purple giant hyssop is a late-flowering, 
native perennial herb of the mint family. It can grow 
unusually tall for a mint; up to 6 feet, with diamond-
shaped stems, aromatic foliage and flowers, and vigorous 
stolons. The stems are erect and form clumps. The upper 
braches may be purplish. 
The densely branched inflorescence is a 1–6 in terminal, 
continuous, or interrupted flower spike, or raceme. The 
plant usually has several spikes. The tops of the spikes 
develop into a flower and two lateral branches develop 
under the flower from a common node; giving the 
inflorescence a symmetrical appearance. The flower 
clusters persist throughout the winter. 
The individual flowers are ¼ in long, 15-nerved tubes that 
are lavender to pale pink. The upper lip has 2 lobes and 
projects forward; and the lower lip curves downwards 
with 3 lobes. The individual lobes are 3-nerved.  
Not all flowers open at the same time. The flowers 
contain 4 stamens that extend beyond the flower. The two 
lower stamens curve upwards, while the two upper 
stamens curve downwards. The pollen sacs are nearly 
parallel. 
A. scrophulariifolia is similar to blue giant hyssop (A. 
foeniculum), however purple giant hyssop has a cup-like 
whorl of green sepals (modified leaf-like bracts under the 
flower) while A. foeniculum has blue-violet sepals. Often 
the sepals of giant purple hyssop have colored margins. 
Nutlets are .05-.07 in (1.5–2 mm), dark brown, rounded, 
and minutely hairy at the squared-off tip.  
The stalked leaves of purple giant hyssop are positioned 
opposite on either side of the stem. The sharp-pointed 
leaves are 4 in long and 2 in wide, with a cordate, 
somewhat heart-shaped or rounded base. The margins of 
the leaves are coarsely toothed and short hairs cover the 
leaf stems. The undersides of the leaves are green, and 

 

smooth or appear shaggy. Conversely, the underside of 
the blue giant hyssop (A. foeniculum) is whitish. The 
species name is derived from the Scrophulariaceae or 
figwort family, for the resemblance of the leaves to the 
figwort. When crushed, the leaves emit a distinct, anise-
like odor. 

height before transplanting. There are 60,000–93,000 
seeds/ounce. 
 
Management 
Because purple giant hyssop requires soil disturbance for 
successful establishment, regular clearings must be 
created and maintained through tree-thinning, elimination 
of competing vegetation, or by delaying natural 
succession cycles.  
 
Populations of purple giant hyssop tend to be short-lived 
because they are easily out-competed. Therefore, field 
plots may need to be re-established every 3–4 years for a 
fuller look. To encourage more vigorous growth, cut 2–6 
in from the plant. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems  
Little is known about potential pests. Anecdotal evidence 
suggests it can be affected by mildew and rusts. There are 
mixed findings on the plant’s susceptibility to browsing 
deer. 
 
The gradual and continued loss of farmland to either 
forests or urbanization continues to threaten a species that 
requires open fields and meadows for habitat.  
 
Environmental Concerns 
None 
 
Prepared By 
Christopher M. Sheahan; USDA-NRCS, Cape May Plant 
Materials Center, Cape May, New Jersey. 
 
Citation 
Sheahan, C.M. 2012. Fact sheet for purple giant hyssop 
(Agastache scrophulariifolia). USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Cape May Plant Materials Center. 
Cape May, NJ. 08210. 
 
Published 07/2012 
 
Edited: 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

 

Purple giant hyssop distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database. 
 
Adaptation: Like many members of the mint family, 
purple giant hyssop grows best in moist soil or wet 
conditions. It is found in rich woodland sites with dappled 
shade, woodland borders, meadows, thickets, the upper 
limits of floodplains, and upland woods. It prefers 
recently disturbed, sandier soils where competition is 
limited. Plants will not persist under hot and dry 
conditions (USDA zone 9 or higher). Threats to its habitat 
include changes in land use, competition from non-native 
species, and natural succession. For updated distribution, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species on 
the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Es tablishment 
Purple giant hyssop requires cold stratification and 
sunlight to germinate. Keep the seed for 8 weeks at 40ºF 
and move to 68ºF for germination. The seeds will 
germinate in 30–90 days in containers with good 
drainage.  When planting in the fall, cold stratification is 
not required. For vegetative propagation, take late spring 
cuttings from the basal growth that emerges in mid-
March. These cuttings can be fertilized for quicker 
establishment. 
 
Purple giant hyssop propagates rapidly by seed and 
transplants easy into natural settings. One can use it in 
dry-site seed mixes for pollinator habitat at 8% of the 
mix. Sow into open ground and cover with a light layer of 
mulch or sow into flats and grow to 12 in (30 cm) in 

 

 

 

 

US DA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

