ORANGE EYE 

BUTTERFLYBUSH 
Buddleja davidii Franch. 

Plant Symbol = BUDA2 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials 
Center 

© G. D. Carr 

 

Caution: This plant may become invasive. 
Alternate Names 
Alternative common names:  Butterfly bush, orange eye, 
summer lilac, purple buddleja, red buddleja 
 
Alternative scientific names:  Buddleia, Buddleja 
variabilis Hemsl. 

Uses 
Ornamental: Orange eye butterflybush has been used in 
the nursery trade for over a hundred years due to its 
pleasant weeping, grey-green foliage and fragrant, 
colorful blooms that attract butterflies, hummingbirds and 
other floral visitors.  Because it can become invasive and 
crowd out desirable native vegetation, sterile varieties or 
hybrids should be chosen when installing new plantings.     

Status 
Orange eye butterflybush is listed as a Class B noxious 
weed in Washington, and in Oregon is a list B designated 
weed, subject to quarantine.  As of January 1, 2010, any 
plant listed as ‘butterfly bush’ is assumed to be B. davidii 
and is prohibited entry, transport, purchase, sale or 
propagation in the State of Oregon.  Sterile varieties of 
Buddleja approved by the Oregon Dept. of Agriculture, 
including inter-specific hybrids, are not regulated and 
may be propagated and sold if labeled as follows: 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

“Seedless Butterfly Bush*.” “*Produces less than 2% 
viable seed.”  Please consult the PLANTS Web site and 
your State Department of Natural Resources for this 
plant’s current status (e.g., threatened or endangered 
species, state noxious status, and wetland indicator 
values). 
Weediness 
This plant establishes readily from seed and stem 
fragments in disturbed or natural areas, especially riparian 
zones, where it can form dense thickets that outcompete 
native vegetation.  Seed can be produced the first year, is 
spread easily by wind and water, and can remain viable in 
the seed bank for three to five years.  Plants are difficult 
to remove once established as they will readily resprout 
from the root crown after the stems are cut.  Please 
consult with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, state natural resource, or state 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.  Weed 
information is also available from the PLANTS Web site 
at http://plants.usda.gov.  Please consult the Related Web 
Sites on the Plant Profile for this species for further 
information. 
Description and Adaptation 
Orange eye butterflybush is a non-native, deciduous to 
semi-evergreen shrub that grows 6–16 feet tall and 4–15 
feet wide.  The leaves are egg- to lance-shaped, up to 10 
inches long, green above and grayish, soft-woolly below, 
growing oppositely on long, arching stems that are green 
when young and have peeling, gray-brown bark when 
older.  Tiny, tubular, four-petaled flowers are arranged in 
large, cone-shaped clusters 3–18 inches long that bloom 
from late spring to first frost in fall.  Flowers are generally 
purplish with a yellow to orange throat, though 
horticultural varieties range from white or yellow to pink 
and deep purple.   
Butterflybush is hardy to -20°F (USDA zones 5–10) and 
prefers moist, well-drained soils in partial to full-sun, 
although it is fairly drought-tolerant once established.  
Roots generally don’t survive in saturated soil.  
Ornamental escapes establish on roadsides, railroad 
tracks, stream and river banks, dryland meadows, dunes, 
coastal forest edges and logged areas, surface mined 
lands, industrial yards and other disturbed areas.  
Native to China, this shrub has been spread widely 
through the horticultural trade and become naturalized in 
many parts of North America, including the pacific 
northwest, northeast, Hawaii and Puerto Rico (see map 
below), as well as western Europe, southeastern Australia 
and New Zealand.  For updated distribution, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 

 
 

 

 

further invasion.  To remove established shrubs, stems 
should be cut off at the base and disposed of properly, and 
then a general use herbicide such as glyphosate or 
triclopyr can be applied to the freshly-cut stump to 
prevent regrowth.  Alternately, infested areas can be 
fenced and browsed by goats for 3-4 years to attain 
acceptable control as part of an integrated pest 
management program.  Two biological control agents are 
being used on an experimental basis in New Zealand, but 
have not yet been tested or approved for use in the US: 
the weevil Cleopus japonicas, whose adults and larvae 
consume butterflybush leaves, and the stem boring beetle, 
Mecyslobus erro.  Please contact your local agricultural 
extension specialist or county weed specialist to learn 
what works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each control 
method.  Trade names and control measures appear in this 
document only to provide specific information.  USDA 
NRCS does not guarantee or warranty the products and 
control methods named, and other products may be 
equally effective. 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
There are over a hundred Buddleja varieties or hybrids 
that are widely available from commercial sources.  As of 
September 2011, the following sterile varieties were 
approved for sale and propagation in Oregon: Buddleja 
'Asian Moon', 'Purple Haze', and 'Ice Chip' (formerly 
'White Icing'); FLUTTERBY GRANDÉ™ Blueberry 
Cobbler Nectar Bush, Peach Cobbler Nectar Bush, Sweet 
Marmalade Nectar Bush, Tangerine Dream Nectar Bush, 
and Vanilla Nectar Bush; FLUTTERBY PETITE™ Snow 
White Nectar Bush; and FLUTTERBY™ Pink Nectar 
Bush.  The following hybrids (between two or more 
Buddleja species) are not regulated in Oregon, and are 
assumed to be sterile, though their fertility has not been 
assessed: Buddleja 'Lilac Chip', 'Blue Chip', 'Miss Molly' 
and 'Miss Ruby'. 
Prepared By  
Anna Young-Mathews 
USDA-NRCS Plant Materials Center, Corvallis, Oregon 
Citation 
Young-Mathews, A. 2011. Plant fact sheet for orange eye 
butterflybush (Buddleja davidii). USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Corvallis Plant 
Materials Center, Corvallis, OR. 
Published September, 2011 
Edited: [06Sept2011 jab] 
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

Orange eye butterflybush distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS 
Database. 

 

Establishment 
Plants can be started easily in the spring from seed, 
container stock or cuttings.  Plants should be given 
sufficient space in the garden as they grow rapidly and 
can shade out neighbors.  They may need summer 
watering in drier climates the first couple of years, but 
most varieties are drought-hardy once established.  There 
are approximately 143,000 seeds per pound.   
Management 
In gardens and yards, flowers should be deadheaded 
before they produce fruits to prolong bloom and prevent 
seeds from establishing in undesirable areas.  In warmer 
climates (USDA zones 8–10) where the shrubs don’t die 
back to the ground during winter, the weeping side 
branches should be pruned in the spring to encourage new 
growth and larger, more prolific blooms.  In cold climates 
(USDA zones 5 and 6), mulch plants in the fall and cut 
back to about a foot high in late winter.  Cut branches 
must be disposed of properly (burned or composted) to 
ensure they don’t sprout into new plants.   
Pests and Potential Problems 
Orange eye butterflybush generally has few pests, but can 
be susceptible to spider mites, caterpillars, weevils, 
mullein moth, fungal leaf spot and dieback, especially 
during drought or stress.   
Environmental Concerns 
Dense thickets of butterflybush can crowd out native 
vegetation and disrupt natural succession patterns on 
forests after logging or burns, and on riverbanks and 
sandbars following floods.  Plants buried by up to 1.5 feet 
of fine sand in a flood can survive by sprouting new roots 
and shoots from buried stems, thus aiding their rapid 
recovery and dominance of early succession riparian 
communities. 
Control 
Seedlings and small plants can be hand-picked or dug out, 
though this soil disturbance can also create sites for 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

