   

CALIFORNIA BROME
Bromus carinatus  Hook. & 

Arn.  

plant symbol = BRCA5 

 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, Oregon 
 

 

Dale Darris 
USDA NRCS Corvallis PMC 

 
Alternate names:  Some taxonomic treatments 
include mountain brome (Bromus marginatus), 
(Bromus carinatus var. marginatus) and others.  
Consult the Flora of North America, Volume 24 
(2007) and Intermountain Flora, Volume 6 (1977).  
 
Uses:  California brome is a medium-tall, 
competitive, native bunchgrass valued for its rapid 
and easy establishment in revegetation and erosion 
control.  It is also widely used for rehabilitation after 
wildfires and mining, rangeland improvement, and 
restoration of upland plant communities.  This 
species is considered to be a moderately to highly 
productive, nutritious, and palatable forage relished 
by all classes of livestock prior to maturity.  In some 
ranges it is important summer forage for elk, but 
considered less palatable to deer.  Bear, geese, and 

                  Plant Fact Sheet     

 

various rodents also consume the foliage.  The deep 
fibrous root system makes the plant fairly resistant to 
grazing and drought.  While a good range grass, use
d 
alone it may not be suitable for permanent pasture 
because of its short longevity.  One of the better uses 
of California brome may be as a native competitor to 
aid in the reduction of exotic weeds a year or two in 
advance of planting other native grasses.  California 
brome provides good cover for wildlife and the seed 
is consumed by small mammals and game bird
s.  It is 
sometimes recommended as a cover cro
p for 
vineyards and orchards in  alifornia.  

C
 

oth 

Description:  California brome is a native, cool-
season, annual, biennial, or short-lived perennial 
bunchgrass.  It is a highly variable species.  The base 
of this robust plant is very open with coarse, erect to
 
spreading stems (culms) that grow 45-120 cm tall. 
Leaf blades are 1-12 mm wide, lax and spread out 
along stems.  The inflorescence (seed head , panicle) 
is 10-30 cm long, large, open, and erect to somewhat 
d
rooping.  The root system is deep and widespread.  
 
Key to identification: California brome intergrades 
with mountain brome and some authors classify b
as the same species.  Other species are also very 
difficult to distinguish from California brome so a 
current taxonomic key should be consulted.  Sitka 
brome (Bromus sitchensis) is a good example and
 
their natural habitats overlap considerably.  Both 
occur in full sun, but Sitka brome can also be found
 
in somewhat shadier environments.  According to 
some taxonomists, Sitka brome is taller with broader, 
more drooping panicles and spikelets (subunits o
f the 
seedhead) that occur more toward the tip of the 
branchlets compared to California brome.  Pacific 
brome (Bromus pacificus) can also be confused with 
both bromes, but its leaves are soft hairy (on at leas
t 
one side) and it has other distinguishing features.  
Pacific brome occurs mainly along the Pacific Co
in moist habitats but extends inland to the Pug
et 
tr
ough of Washington at low elevations. 
 
Adaptation:  California brome is widely distributed 
in western North America from British Columbia and 
Alberta south to California and Mexico and eastward 
to Montana, Wyoming, Colorado, and New Mexico.
 
It occurs in open areas including meadows, coastal 
prairies, montane slopes, and waste places as w
open woodlands, oak savanna, sagebrush, and 
chaparral from sea level to 11,000 ft in elevation.  
The species is adapted to moderately moist to dr
y 
soils with a pH of 5.5 to 8.0.  While tolerant of 
somewhat poor drainage and fine textured clays, best 
growth is attained on medium-textured or loamy soils 

ell as 

ast 

Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 

 

with good drainage. It is found in environments with
full sun to slight shade.  The species withstands fall 
fires and controlled burns and will sprout from 
surviving crowns. In other cases, stands may top
ut full stand recovery occurs after a few years. 
b
 
Commercial availability:   Seed is readily foun
the market. Sources derived from local, natural 
origins should be favored.  Cultivated varieties are 
a
lso available for use in certain regions of the West.  
 

 kill 

d on 

 
                  
Line drawing reprinted with permission, 
             University of Washington Press  
 
Relative abundance in the wild:  The species is 
adows, and waste 
very common in open areas, me
laces.  Seed is easy to collect. 
p
 
Limitations or environmental concerns:  Cal
brome spreads easily by seed and can quickly 
become a moderate to serious weed pest in cert
agricultural crops.  Its use should generally be 
avoided in certain areas of intensive agriculture such 
as fields of introduced grasses grown for seed. Seed 
h 
may remain viable in the soil for several years.  Hig
seeding rates in mixes with other less competitive 
native grasses should be avoided.  California brome 
is susceptible to a disease called head smut.  Wild 
stands or fields to be harvested for seed should be 
inspected carefully for the disease and infected p
avoided or removed. Smut can be controlled by 

ain 

lants 

ifornia 

 

 

t 
om 

d 

07. 

eating the seed with an approved fungicide prior to 
tr
sowing.  Leaf and stem rusts are other potential pests. 
 
Establishment:  Seed dormancy is usually absent in 
natural populations from low elevation so California 
brome can be fall or spring sown.  Germination 
occurs in 10-14 days and seedling growth and plan
development are rapid.  However, seed obtained fr
ancy 
higher elevation populations may have dorm
requiring 30-90 days of cold moist stratification 
(moist pre-chilling) or fall sowing for best 
germination.  Physical conditioning of the seed to 
 
remove the awns (narrow appendage at the tip of the
 
seed) is an option to improve flow through seeding
equipment.  There are 60, 000-82,000 seeds/lb with 
the upper range associated with de-awned seed. 
Therefore, each pound of seed planted per acre will 
result in about 1.5-2.0 seeds/sq. ft.  When sown 
alone, the suggested rate is 8-10 lbs of pure live see
LS) per acre.  Lower rates (1-3 lbs/ac) should be 
(P
ses.   
used in seed mixes with less competitive gras
 
Stand management depends on your project 
objectives (prairie restoration, cover crop, rotation
al 
livestock grazing, etc.). As a cover crop, the species 
has intermediate tolerance to mowing.  Fire is an 
effective tool for post harvest residue management
se
grazing but incre
 
Prepared By:  
D
Corvallis, Oregon. July 20
 
Species Coordinato
D
Corvallis, Oregon
 
Edited: 070723 jsp 
 
For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or Conservation District, and 
PLANTS Web site<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Program Web site <
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national origin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 

 in 
ed production.  The species decreases under heavy 

ale Darris, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 

ale Darris, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 

ases with light to moderate use.  

http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>  

Materials 

visit the 

r:  

. 

To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Offic
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider  d employer.
 
Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service 

, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 

an

e 

