BURNINGBUSH 

Bassia scoparia (L.) A.J. Scott 

Plant Symbol = BASC5 

 
 Contributed by: USDA NRCS Kansas Plant Materials 
Center, Manhattan, Kansas  

 

Figure 1. P. Allen Casey. 2009. USDA-NRCS. Burningbush that 
exhibits red colored stems.  Found on a disturbed site along a gravel 
road. Riley County, Kansas  
 
Alternate Names  
Bassia scoparia; Bassia sieversiana; Kochia alata; 
Kochia trichophila; Kochia trichophylla; kochia, Mexican 
fireweed; mock cypress; fireweed; mirabel; summer 
cypress; common kochia; Mexican summer-cypress; 
railroad weed; belvedere; firebush; poor man’s alfalfa; 
common red sage  
  
Caution: This plant is highly invasive.  
Caution: This plant can be toxic.  
 
Uses  
Burningbush is used by wildlife for food and cover.  It 
can be hayed or grazed directly for livestock feed.  
Burningbush can be planted for soil erosion control and 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

bioremediation of some contaminated sites.  It is used in 
some Asian cultures for food and in some parts of Europe 
and Asia it is planted for making brooms.  Burningbush 
contains compounds that could be used in medicines.  
  
Status  
This plant is or can be noxious and/or invasive in some 
areas.  Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your 
State Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
  
Weediness  
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation 
if not properly managed.  Please consult with your local 
NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service 
office, state natural resource, or state agriculture 
department regarding its status and use.  Weed 
information is also available from the PLANTS Web site 
at plants.usda.gov.  Please consult the Related Web Sites 
on the Plant Profile for this species for further 
information.  
  
Description and Adaptation  
Burningbush is an introduced, erect, annual forb.  The 
simple, alternately arranged leaves are linear to narrowly 
ovate to 2 inches (5.5 cm) long and can have hairs, 
depending on age.  Leaves are very short petioled or 
sessile.  Stems are green, red tinged, or red depending on 
age.  The flowers are green leaf-like bracts. It has a spike.  
Burningbush has small fruits with an oval, brown to black 
seed.  Burningbush varies widely in morphological 
characters partially due the environment where it is found.  
  
Burningbush is native to central and eastern Europe and 
Asia.  Burningbush can be found in a very wide range of 
temperatures and climatic regions throughout the world, 
but is particularly adapted to arid and semi-arid regions.  
Burningbush is common in rangelands, pastures, fields, 
disturbed sites, gardens, roadsides, ditchbanks, and in 
soils with high salinity.  It can be found in areas with as 
little as 6 inches (15.24 cm) of annual rainfall.  
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> National Plant 
Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov>  
 

 
 

 

 

Control  
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use it safely.  Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method.Trade names 
and control measures appear in this document only to 
provide specific information.  USDA NRCS does not 
guarantee or warranty the products and control methods 
named, and other products may be equally effective.  
Herbicides generally become less effective as the plant 
matures.  Some populations have shown resistance to 2, 
4-D, triazine, auxinic herbicides, dicamba, and 
sufonylurea.  The herbicide 2, 4-D, itself, does not 
provide acceptable control regardless of formulation, 
dose, or timing of the application.  
  
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
These plant materials are somewhat available from 
commercial sources as an ornamental.  These plant 
materials are not readily available from commercial 
sources for use as livestock forage.  
  
Prepared By   
P. Allen Casey, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Manhattan, Kansas  
  
Citation  
Casey, P.A. 2009. Plant Fact Sheet for burningbush 
Bassia scoparia (L.) A.J. Scott. USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Kansas Plant Materials Center. 
Manhattan, KS.  

Published October 2009 

Edited:  

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

Burningbush distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database.  
  
For updated distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
  
Establishment  
Soil should be plowed or disked and weed free. Planting 
should be done late April to early May.  Liming of the 
soil to a pH of 6.0 is recommended. Nitrogen should be 
applied before planting and topdressing the remainder 
later depending on the anticipated yield.  Planting can be 
done by drilling or broadcast planting by hand or by 
airplane.  
  
Management  
Burningbush is palatable to all classes of livestock.  It can 
be toxic to livestock and may cause death if consumed in 
large quantities.  It is recommended that burningbush 
forage should consist of not more than 50% of livestock 
ration.  Burningbush stands can be grazed by livestock 
directly or it can be cut for hay or silage.  Care should be 
taken to prevent poisoning.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems  
Burningbush may be host to various fungi, pathogens, and 
insects, some of which can be detrimental to crops like 
sugarbeet, potatoes, and tobacco. Grasses will out 
compete burningbush.  Volunteer burningbush is likely to 
be a problem in crops that are planted following 
burningbush.  
  
Environmental Concerns  
Burningbush is highly invasive and is able to establish 
and persist in harsh environments where other plants are 
limited.  Burningbush may be hard to control once it is 
established in an area.    
  

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 
 
 
 
 

 

