FIELD THISTLE 

Cirsium discolor (Muhl. ex Willd.) 

Spreng. 

Plant Symbol = CIDI 

 
Contributed by: USDA, NRCS, Norman A. Berg National 
Plant Materials Center, Beltsville, MD 

Field thistle flower and hummingbird clearwing moth.© Randy Pheobus 
  

 

Alternate Names 
Carduus discolor (Muhl. ex Willd.) Nutt 

Uses 
Wildlife: The large flowers and abundant nectar are very 
attractive to many species of butterflies, hummingbirds, 
bees and moths.  Many other species will also use other 
plant parts for food, including the leaves, stems, roots, 
flower heads and seeds.  Seeds are attractive to seed 
eating birds such as such as the American goldfinch.      
 
Ethnobotanical:  Field thistle, like other Cirsium species, 
has edible roots, inner stems, young leaves, young inner 
parts of flower buds and seeds.  Native Americans used a 
paste of the roots for treating wounds, boils, and piles, 
and also used an infusion of the root for treating stomach 
ache.  Native Americans also used the thistle down (or 
pappus) from the seeds to fletch the tail end of blow darts.       

Status 
Arkansas and Iowa list the entire genus of Cirsium as a 
noxious weed, including all native as well as non-native 
species in the genus.  Please consult the PLANTS Web 
site and your State Department of Natural Resources for 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

this plant’s current status (e.g., threatened or endangered 
species, state noxious status, and wetland indicator 
values). 

Weediness 
Seeds are naturally wind dispersed although most seeds 
fall fairly close to the original plant.  Field thistle can 
sometimes be found in pastures (usually overgrazed), but 
unlike non-native thistles it is not invasive and weedy in 
properly managed agricultural fields.  Please consult with 
your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension 
Service office, state natural resource, or state agriculture 
department regarding its status and use.  Weed 
information is also available from the PLANTS Web site 
at http://plants.usda.gov.  Please consult the Related Web 
Sites on the Plant Profile for this species for further 
information. 

Description and Adaptation 
Field thistle is a native biennial or short lived perennial 
(monocarpic) thistle growing in much of the eastern 
half of the U.S. and Canada.  It can be found growing 
in meadows, wood edges and openings, field borders, 
abandoned fields, pastures and roadsides.  Field thistle 
initially grows in a basal rosette form (circle of leaves 
originating from one growing point at the soil surface).   
 
Plants only form flowering stems after growing through 
at least one winter and sometimes two or three.  Stems 
grow 2–8 inches tall and are branched on the upper 
third.  Stems have white hairs, and lack the spiny wings 
found on many non-native thistles.  Leaves alternate on 
the stem and have deep spine-tipped lobes.  Leaves 
have a distinctive white mat of fine hairs on the 
undersides and sparse, week hairs on the upper surface.   
 
The lavender pink to light pink, or rarely white flower 
heads are about 2 inches across and consist of many 
narrow tube-shaped flowers about 1½ inches long.  
Flowers billow out from a narrow base, forming a 
distinctive mushroom shape.  The flower base has 
overlapping green bracts with white center-lines and 
sharply angled, thin needle like spines.  Field thistle 
can be found blooming from late summer to fall, with 
individual plants bloom for about a month.  Seeds have 
long downy plumes that aid dispersal by the wind.  
Plants typically have a large central taproot with some 
coarse rope-like secondary roots.   
 
 

 
 

 

 

natural systems or low intensity unmanaged pastures, but 
may not be desirable in highly managed pastures. 

Control 
Field thistle does not spread by underground stems 
(rhizomes) or roots and is not invasive or as difficult to 
control as non-native thistles.  Unlike the non-native 
thistles, many of the native thistles have become 
uncommon in the landscape.  Get to know your local 
thistle species so that you can distinguish the non-native 
weeds to be removed, from the native species that are 
important for the pollinators!  Please contact your local 
agricultural extension specialist or county weed specialist 
to learn what control methods work best in your area and 
how to use it safely.  Always read label and safety 
instructions for each control method.   

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 

Prepared By  
R. Jay Ugiansky and Randy Pheobus; USDA, NRCS, 
Norman A. Berg National Plant Materials Center 

Citation 
Ugiansky, R., and R. Pheobus. 2010. Plant fact sheet for 
field thistle (Cirsium discolor). USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Norman A. Berg National Plant 
Materials Center. Beltsville, MD 20705. 

Published: Sept. 2010 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Field thistle distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database. 

For updated distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 

Establishment 
Field thistle grows well with full sun to partial shade and 
average to dry soil moisture.  It is best to plant field thistle 
in an area where competing vegetation has been removed.  
In late fall to early spring, seeds can be sown directly on 
bare soil and lightly covered with no more than one 
quarter inch of soil raked or spread over the seed.  Seeds 
may also be sown in containers and transplanted when 
plants are large enough to be handled.  Plants have a deep 
root system and should not require supplemental water 
once established.  Plants of good size going into winter 
will generally bloom the following late summer.  

Management 
Field thistle will die after flowering and maturing seed, 
but will readily self seed on open soil or with sparse 
vegetation.  Reducing competition from very competitive 
plants such as tall fescue will yield larger plants.      

Pests and Potential Problems 
Several introduced species of weevil can cause significant 
damage to field thistle.  The larvae of the Canada thistle 
bud weevil (Larinus planus) feeds on developing seeds 
and flower parts, reducing the number and quality of 
seeds produced.  The larvae of the thistle crown weevil 
(Trichosirocalus horriduscan) feed on the inner parts of 
the crown where the leaves and stem meet the roots.  The 
resulting damage often leads to a secondary fungal 
infection that kills the entire plant.   

Environmental Concerns 
Grazing animals will avoid grazing the immediate area 
around thistles.  Since thistle will tend to grow in the 
over-grazed areas, this naturally allows areas to recover 
from over-gazing and therefore may be desirable in 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

