AMERICAN 

BEAUTYBERRY 
Callicarpa americana L. 

Plant Symbol = CAAM2 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS NRCS East Texas Plant 
Materials Center 

 

Jeff McMillian@USDA-NRCS PLANTS 

 
Alternate Names 
American beautyberry is also known as French mulberry, 
sourbush, bunchberry, or purple beauty-berry. In Greek, 
the genus name Callicarpa means callos, “beauty” and 
carpos “fruit”. 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: The roots, leaves, and branches were used 
by various Native American tribes for medicinal purposes 
to treat malarial fevers and rheumatism. The roots were 
used to treat dizziness, stomachaches and dysentery.  
Roots and berries were boiled and drunk to treat colic. 
 
In the early 20th century, farmers would crush the leaves 
and place them under the harnesses of horses and mules to 
repel mosquitoes. The farmers rubbed the crushed leaves 
on themselves to repel mosquitoes and biting bugs. 
Studies conducted by the Agricultural Research Service 
has shown two compounds – callicarpenal and 
intermedeol - are responsible for the repellant. 
 
Wildlife: The fruit is high in moisture content and is an 
important food source for more than forty species of 
songbirds including the American Robin, Brown 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

Thrasher, Purple Finch, and Eastern Towhee. The drupes 
or clusters are eaten by armadillo, foxes, opossum, 
raccoon and squirrels. White tailed deer consume the fruit 
in the fall after leaf drop. They also browse the leaves in 
summer when highly preferred foods are not available. 
Protein content of the leaves ranges from 18 percent in 
spring to 8 percent in fall. 
 
Other: American beautyberry is used as an ornamental 
shrub in mass plantings, borders and container planting. 
 
Livestock: Cattle browse the twigs in winter and the 
leaves and twigs in the spring. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site; 
http://plants.usda.gov  and your State Department of 
Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description and Adaptation 
American beautyberry is a fast growing native perennial 
shrub; growing five to eight feet tall and almost as wide 
with drooping branches. The elliptical to ovate shaped 
leaves have an opposite arrangement with saw toothed 
margins. The underside of the leaves may be covered with 
wooly like hairs. The stems are slender, gray to reddish 
brown, and terete or four sided. In late spring to early 
summer, inconspicuous flowers of blue, violet, pink, or 
white are arranged in clusters on the stems between the 
leaves. In August or September, clusters of small purple 
to blue berries or drupes encircle the woody stems. Each 
small berry in the cluster contains two to four seeds about 
1/16 in. long. 
 
This plant is distributed throughout the southeastern 
United States from Texas and Oklahoma east to 
Maryland. It also grows in the Caribbean and northern 
Mexico. American beautyberry is found in woods, 
particularly on moist areas under open pine canopies, 
thickets, right of ways, and fence rows. It is adapted to 
moist, loam, sandy or shallow upland sites and a wide pH 
range. The shrub is considered a pioneer species and is 
characteristic of the mid stages of plant succession. This 
plant is very tolerant of fire. However, it is intolerant of 
deep shade and declines in number when mid-story 
vegetation is dense. 

 
 

 

 

 

American beautyberry distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS 
Database. 
 
For updated distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment 
American beautyberry can be propagated by transplanting 
volunteer plants, softwood cuttings, or seeds. Volunteer 
plants are very hearty and can be dug up and transplanted 
to a different location. Softwood stem cuttings (4” to 6” 
long) can be taken in the summer and fall. Dip the cut end 
into indol -3 – butyric acid (IBA; 1000 ppm) and insert 
into a rooting media. Keep the temperature of the media 
between 70-750. Water the cuttings and cover with plastic 
to keep the material moist. Roots should develop within a 
few weeks. After rooting begins, remove the plastic at 
longer intervals each day for seven to ten days. 
Afterwards, remove the plastic permanently. The seed is 
easily gathered by hand picking the mature fruit in the 
fall. The harvested berries, which contain 2 to 4 seeds 
each, can be treated in several ways; one is planting the 
berries in the fall for spring germination. American 
beautyberry seeds can survive several years in the soil 
bank. Another way is cleaning the seeds using a kitchen 
blender for small seedlots. Mix the berries with at least 
five times their volume of water and pour into the 
blender. Run the blender at its lowest speed using short 
bursts of a few seconds at a time to separate the skin and 
tissue from the seeds. Eventually, mature seeds sink to the 
bottom, while immature seeds, skins and tissue remain 
near the top. Check the seeds for possible damage. Pour 
off the unwanted material and repeat the process two or 
three times. Eventually, a clean seed sample will be left at 
the bottom of the blender. Drain the seeds and spread 
them out to dry. After drying, the seeds are ready for 
planting or storage in a cool, dry place. 

Management 
Prune the plants in the fall or winter to maintain its form. 
Cut away the old stems since the berries are present only 
on new growth. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Some of the diseases which affect this genus include leaf 
spots (Atractilina callicarpae) and black mold (Meliola 
cookeana). 
 
Environmental Concerns 
American  beautyberry  seed  is  dispersed  by  birds  and 
animals. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
This plant is available from commercial sources. Some 
nurseries produce a white fruited plant; C. Americana var. 
lactea. 
 
Prepared By: Melinda Brakie, USDA NRCS Plant 
Materials Center, Nacogdoches, Texas. 
 
Citation 
Brakie, M. 2010. Plant fact sheet for American 
beautyberry (Callicarpa americana). USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, East Texas Plant 
Materials Center. Nacogdoches, TX, 75964. 
 
Published:  September 2010 

. 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

