 

 

 

 

MAY HAWTHORN 
Crataegus aestivalis Walt. 

Plant Symbol = CRAE 

 

Contributed by: East Texas Plant Materials Center 

 

 

Alternative Names 
Eastern May Hawthorn, Apple May Hawthorn, Summer 
Haw and Mayhaw 

Uses 
 Food: 
 The fruit is frequently used for preserves and jellies and 
can also be dried for later use. 
 
Erosion control:  
Can be used in shelter belts and stream- bank 
stabilization. 
 
Wildlife:  
 Provides nesting sites and cover for small birds. Birds 
and small mammals eat the fruit. Whitetail deer browse 
the leaves and young stems. 
 
Timber:  
 The wood is heavy and strong but is too small for 
commercial use. Eastern May Hawthorn wood is used 
locally for tool handles and mallets. 
 
Medicinal:  
 It has been used as a tea in herbal folk medicine for 
treatment of high blood pressure.  
 
Landscaping:  
 In recent years this plant has become popular with home 
and commercial landscapers due to the plant’s showy 

  Plant Fact Sheet

white flowers, attractive foliage and ability to adapt to a 
variety of sites. 
 

Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 

Description and Adaptation 
 Description: A member of the Rosaceae family, the May 
Hawthorn is a deciduous, small, round- topped tree 
growing to 30 feet in height. Leaves are dark green, 
simple, and are alternately arranged.. Flowers are white 
and produced either singly or in clusters of 2 or 3.The 
fruit is a fleshy, red pome borne in May, contributing to 
the common name “Mayhaw”. Twigs are brown to gray 
and spiny. 
  

 

May Hawthorn distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS 
Database. 
Adaptation: While preferring full sun, Eastern May 
Hawthorn will tolerate partial shade. Once established it 
will also tolerate wet soils and drought conditions. It will 
grow in a variety of soil types, but preferring well 
drained, slightly acid soils. Their tolerances to air 
pollution make it a good choice for urban sites. 
For updated distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 

 

 

 

 

Establishment 
Under natural conditions Eastern May Hawthorn seeds do 
not germinate until overwintered. Successful seed 
germination requires acid stratification followed by warm 
stratification and chilling. Propagation can also be done 
using softwood stem cuttings rooted under an intermittent 
mist. The use of a rooting hormone will increase rooting 
success.   
 
Propagation from hardwood and root cuttings is also 
possible. Grafting to English Hawthorn   (Crataegus 
oxyacantha or Single Seeded Hawthorn (Crataegus 
monogyna   rootstock is possible but should be done in 
winter or early spring. 

Management 
Annual pruning in the winter to open up the tree canopy 
will be beneficial in increasing fruit production. In 
addition weak branches and sucker stems should be 
removed at this time. 

Pests and Potential Problems 
May Hawthorn is susceptible to some of the same insects 
and diseases that attack other pome fruits. These include 
insects such as the hawthorn lace bug and roundheaded 
appletree borer along with leafminers and mealy bugs. 
Diseases affecting May Hawthorn include fire-blight, 
cedar-hawthorn blight, cedar quince blight and fruit rot. 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
Commercially available Crataegus aestivalis include: 
Lori -80% harvest at one time and Linsey also with 
concentrated ripening.  

Prepared By  
Michael Woody Biological Science Technician, East 
Texas Plant Materials Center, Nacogodoches Texas 

Citation 
Woody, Michael L. 2012. Plant fact sheet for May 
Hawthorn (Crataegus aestivalis). USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, East Texas Plant 
Material Center. Nacogdoches, Texas, 75964. 
Published  January 2012 
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

