ERECT DAYFLOWER 

Commelina erecta var. 

angustifolia (Michx.) Fern. 

plant symbol = COERA 

 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS Kika de la Garza 
Plant Materials Center 
 
Alternate Names 
whitemouth dayflower, 
widow’s tears, narrowleaf 
dayflower, and hierba del 
pollo 

 
 
 
 
 

Uses 
Wildlife:  Erect dayflower (Commelina erecta var. 
angustifolia) is said to be a preferred food source for 
white-tailed deer, so it is a good plant to consider when 
establishing deer food plots. In addition, bobwhite quail, 
white-winged doves and mourning doves eat its seeds.  
 
Restoration:  Erect dayflower can also be a good plant for 
native area restoration projects. 
 
Forage:  Cattle are known to graze erect dayflower. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Erect dayflower is a perennial, warm-season, herbaceous 
forb.  A member of the spiderwort (Commelinaceae) 
family, erect dayflower has also  

 
 

 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

been known by the common names of widow’s tears, 
narrowleaf dayflower, and hierba del pollo.  According to 
Ajilvsgi (1991), erect dayflower is said to be named for 
the three Commelin brothers who were all Dutch 
botanists, although only two were productive in their 
field.  Erect dayflower’s two larger petals are said to 
represent the two Commelins who were published, while 
the third inconspicuous petal represents the unpublished 
brother.  
 
Erect dayflower has a showy blue flower that is attractive, 
but ephemeral (lasting only a day) and blooms from 
March to December in Texas.  Erect dayflower starts out 
erect, becoming decumbent as it matures.  There are 
currently three varieties that are found in Texas: erecta, 
deamiana, and angustifolia.    The variety angustifolia is 
native to South Texas.  Erect dayflower is often 
considered a weed, especially in rice fields.  
 
Adaptation 
Erect dayflower can be found from Wisconsin south to 
Arizona and Florida, west to Wyoming, and throughout 
most of the eastern United States. It is common in the 
eastern two-thirds of Texas, but can be found throughout 
the state. Erect dayflower can grow in both sandy and 
clayey soils in almost all habitats.  It is found along 
streambanks, in gardens, on prairies, along roadsides, and 
in waste places.   
 
Known Distribution 

  

 
Establishment 
Erect dayflower can be grown from cuttings or seed.  An 
informal germination test conducted in the greenhouse at 
the PMC yielded a germination average of 87% with 
approximately twelve hours of daylight at 75-85ºF and 
twelve hours of darkness at 50-60ºF.  Cuttings of 
dayflower had about an 80% survival rate with one node 
and three node stem cuttings.   It is recommended that a 

rooting hormone be used to encourage rapid rooting.  
Cuttings and seedlings can be transplanted in 6-8 weeks.  
Irrigation is recommended, although not critical, at drier 
sites to help the young plants get established.  It is 
recommended that young plants be at least 6 inches in 
height before transplanting. 
 
The use of plastic plant shelters is beneficial to protect 
young plants from heavy grazing, reduce plant 
competition, and create a more beneficial microclimate 
until young plants can get established. 
 
Management 
Weed control is a problem in a dayflower plot as the 
leggy plants make it difficult to remove the weeds without 
removing the plants.  A weed mat is recommended for 
situations, such as seed or plant production plantings, 
where weed control is a necessity.  In other situations, 
such as deer food plots, weed control may not be an issue.  
Irrigation is recommended during drier periods for seed 
and plant production plantings.   
 
The seed of erect dayflower is easy to process once 
harvested.  However, the prostrate and indeterminate 
growth form of erect dayflower results in harvests of very 
small quantities of seed.  This makes commercial 
production of large quantities of seed uneconomical, and 
limits its use for large-scale seeding and plantings.   
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
John Lloyd-Reilley, Manager 
Elizabeth Kadin, Research Assistant 
Shelly D. Maher, Research Scientist 
Kika de la Garza Plant Materials Center 
Kingsville, Texas 
 

Published: October 2002 

Edited: 1Oct2002 SDM  

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

.

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

