NEW JERSEY TEA 
Ceanothus americanus L. 

Plant Symbol = CEAM 

 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Manhattan Plant Materials 
Center 

  

New Jersey tea in full flower from the PLANTS Database. 
Alternate Names redroot, Indian tea, wild snowball, 
snowbrush, and soapbloom 
 
Uses 
Wildlife: Rabbit, elk and deer browse New Jersey tea and 
turkey and quail eat the fruit. The small flowers attract 
numerous insects, especially bees, wasps, flies, and 
beetles. Butterflies and moths visit the flowers 
occasionally. These insects collect nectar from the 
flowers, although bees may also collect pollen. The 
caterpillars of the butterfly Celestina neglecta (summer 
azure) and the skipper Erynnis martialis (Mottled 
Duskywing) feed on the flowers, flower buds, and fruit of 
a variety of small woody shrubs including New Jersey tea.   
 
Ethnobotanical: Tribes of the Missouri River region used 
the leaves for tea and the roots for fuel on hunting trips. 
Tribes of the Great Lakes Bioregion ascribed great power 
to its treatment of bowel troubles. Although New Jersey 
tea was never listed in the U.S. Pharmacopeia, it was used 
by some physicians. New Jersey tea is a strong astringent 
(8 percent tannins) and contains an alkaloid that is mildly 
hypotensive. The leaves contain the flavonols afzelin, 
quercitrin, and rutin. It was used by colonists during the 
Revolutionary War as a substitute for tea even though the 
leaves contained no caffeine. Recently it was discovered 
that the roots contain a blood-clotting agent. 

 
 

 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

 
Landscaping: New Jersey tea is a pretty shrub that can be 
cultivated for its fragrant white flower clusters and leaves 
for tea. Horticulturists have stated that it should be grown 
more as an ornamental plant especially in droughty sites. 
  
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description and Adaptation  
 

 
New Jersey tea distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database. 
 
General: Buckthorn Family (Rhamnaceae).  This 
shrubby, upright, deciduous, native perennial grows to 
approximately 3 feet in height. It will tiller at the base, 
sending up multiple stems. Its stems are light green and 
covered with fine white hairs which become woody with 
age in the absence of fire or browsing by wildlife. Leaves 
are alternate and broadly oblong-ovate, up to 3 inches 
long and 2 inches wide. The underside of the leaf is light 
green and covered with fine white hairs. The leaf margins 
are smooth to finely serrate, and slightly ciliate. The 
simple leaves have short petioles and three conspicuous 
palmate veins. From the axils of the upper leaves emerge 
long stalked clusters of numerous white flowers. These 
clusters of flowers are elongated and rounded. Each 
individual flower consists of a long slender tube 
terminated in five folded sepals. When the calyx opens 
five hatchet shaped petals with slender bases spread 
outward, while a large pistil and five stamens, with dark 
gray anthers emerge from the flower’s center.  The 
flowers have a pleasant fragrance and bloom for about a 
month during early summer. Later, three small (1/4 inch) 

 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
The New Jersey tea is easily found in nurseries, garden 
stores and other plant dealers and distributors. It is native 
to the United States and has a moderate lifespan and a 
slow growth rate.  
 
Prepared By  
Richard L. Wynia, USDA-NRCS Manhattan Plant 
Materials Center, Manhattan, KS.  
 
Citation 
Wynia, R.L. 2010. Plant fact sheet for New Jersey tea 
(Ceanothus americanus). USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Manhattan Plant Materials Center. 
Manhattan, KS 66502. 

Published:  September 2010 

Edited:  04Aug2010rw 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov>

lobed fruits (Drupe) form, splitting into three carpels each 
containing a smooth coated, elliptical, brown seed. The 
root system consists of a stout, deeply anchored reddish 
taproot. Thus, the common name for New Jersey tea is red 
root.     
For updated distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Adaptation: New Jersey tea is usually found on the sandy 
soils of open woodlands and prairies, and on rocky 
hillsides. It is fire adapted with top growth being typically 
killed by fire, but vigorous resprouting from the 
undamaged rootstock. It has the ability to slowly spread 
from seed production; however the seedling vigor is 
considered quite low.  
Drought resistance is very good, under severe drought the 
leaves will become discolored and shrivel, but quickly 
revive when moisture returns. 
 
Establishment 
It can be propagated by root division in the fall, softwood 
cuttings forced in the greenhouse in spring, or by seed. 
Seed of New Jersey tea should be planted outside in the 
fall or early winter in a well drained soil site with full sun. 
Note that the plant does not require cold moist 
stratification, but spring plantings have been enhanced by 
submerging the seed in 180 degree Fahrenheit water the 
night before planting and allowing seeds to soak in the 
slowly cooling liquid. Since there are many mammalian 
herbivores that browse this species its establishment can 
be a challenge when there are large populations of these 
active browsing species about. 
 
Management 
Fire is a beneficial management tool in promoting the 
spread of this species. It has a high tolerance for drought 
and restricted water conditions. The plant cannot survive 
exposure to temperatures below negative 28 degrees 
Fahrenheit. New Jersey tea is listed as a threatened 
species in the state of Maine. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Foliar disease is rarely a significant problem for this 
species; however it is susceptible to leaf spot and 
powdery mildew.  
 
Control 
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use it safely.  Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method.  Trade names 
and control measures appear in this document only to 
provide specific information.  USDA NRCS does not 
guarantee or warranty the products and control methods 
named, and other products may be equally effective. 
 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

