 

 

 

 
FAREWELL TO SPRING 

Clarkia amoena (Lehm.) A. 

Nelson & J.F. Macbr. 

Plant Symbol = CLAM 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials 
Center, Oregon  

Photo by A. Young-Mathews, Corvallis Plant Materials Center, 2011 

 

Alternative Names 
Alternate Common Names:  farewell-to-spring, summer’s 
darling, herald-of-summer, atlas flower, lovely farewell-
to-spring, Rocky Mountain garland flower, godetia, satin 
flower, red ribbons, fairy fans 
Alternate Scientific Names:  Godetia amoena (Lehm.) G. 
Don, Oenothera amoena Lehm., Oenothera prismatica 
var. amoena (Lehm.) H. Lév. 

Uses 
Ornamental: As the Latin name suggests (amoena 
meaning beautiful or pleasing), this plant makes a 
beautiful addition to many types of gardens including 
beds, borders, containers, dry banks, cottage gardens, rock 
gardens and wildflower meadows.  The flowers make 
excellent, long-lasting bouquets. 
Pollinators: Flowers serve as a nectar source for 
European honey bees, as well as native bumble bees, 
mason bees, butterflies and other beneficial insects.  
Farewell to spring is often included in native wildflower 
mixes for bee and butterfly meadows or gardens, and 
should be planted in patches at least 3 to 6 ft in diameter 
for best attraction.     

  Plant Fact Sheet

Ethnobotanic: Clarkia amoena seeds were parched and 
then pounded into a dry seed meal and eaten by the Sierra 
Miwok in the Sierra Nevada foothills of California. 

Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Description and Adaptation 
Farewell to spring, a member of the evening primrose 
family (Onagraceae), is a common, native, annual 
wildflower that grows ½ to 3 feet tall.  Stems are upright 
to spreading, leafy, covered in fine, short hairs, somewhat 
grayish-green, often reddish below, and may be branched 
or simple.  The alternate leaves are linear to lance-shaped, 
usually 1 to 3 inches long, smooth-edged, with lower 
leaves often falling by flowering time, while the upper 
leaves are more persistent and often folded.  The flowers 
are single or in open to dense inflorescences with buds 
held erect.  Flowers are cup-shaped, pale pink to deep 
wine red, and have four petals that are usually less than 
1½ inches long, with more or less notched edges, often 
with a crimson to scarlet or purplish marking in their 
center.  Flowers have eight stamens and a single pistil 
with a 4-lobed stigma.  Flowering period is late spring to 
mid-summer.  Fruits are long, narrow, straight to curved, 
pod-like dry capsules ¼ to 1½ inches long that ripen in 
the fall.  There are five generally recognized subspecies of 
C. amoena, although intermediates among subspecies are 
common: Hunt’s clarkia (C. a. ssp. huntiana), Lindley’s 
clarkia (C. a. ssp. lindleyi), northwestern farewell to 
spring (C. a. ssp. caurina), Whitney’s clarkia (C. a. ssp. 
whitneyi), and farewell to spring (C. a. ssp. amoena).  

Farewell to spring distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database. 

 

 

 

Farewell to spring prefers relatively dry, open slopes but 
is also found in meadows, prairies, seaside bluffs, coastal 
scrub, forest edges, roadsides and spring-wet areas.  
Plants grow best in full sun to light shade and well-
drained to dry soil, but also tolerate seaside conditions, 
alkaline soil, salt, sand and clay.  This species’ native 
distribution ranges from southern British Columbia west 
of the Cascades south to the coast of central California 
and east in the Columbia River Gorge at elevations below 
3000 ft, but it also has been introduced in Quebec.  For 
updated distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page 
for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 

Establishment 
Plants are easily established from seed by direct sowing 
on site in the fall or early spring.  They can also be sown 
in flats of potting soil indoors and planted out at a spacing 
of 6 to 12 inches after the last frost date in the spring, but 
plants will generally be sturdier if direct-seeded.  Seeds 
do not require pre-treatment, and should be surface 
broadcast onto a firm, well-drained, weed-free seedbed at 
a rate of approximately 2 pounds per acre.  Soils should 
not be over-fertilized or the plants will produce abundant, 
leggy foliage and few blooms.  There are approximately 
816,000 to 1,100,000 seeds per pound, so sowing one 
pound of seed per acre will result in 19 to 25 seeds per 
square foot.  

Management 
This species is drought-tolerant and requires little 
maintenance once established.  In a suitable location the 
plants will readily self-sow. 

Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no serious pest or disease problems, though 
plants are susceptible to powdery mildew, verticillium 
wilt, stem rot and leaf spot, as well as aphids, mites and 
Japanese beetles. 

Clarkia amoena ssp. lindleyi, © 2006, G.D. Carr 

 

Environmental Concerns 
Farewell to spring readily self-sows, so blooms should be 
deadheaded if you do not want volunteer seedlings the 
next season. 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
Seed of farewell to spring is widely available from 
commercial sources.  There are at least a dozen improved 
horticultural cultivars on the market that range in color 
from white to peach to deep magentas, and include dwarfs 
and some cultivars selected for leafier plants or highly 
dissected petals giving them a semi-double appearance.  
Flowers of improved cultivars are often larger and more 
abundant than those of wild ecotypes. 

Prepared By 
Annie Young-Mathews, Conservation Agronomist  
USDA-NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials Center, Oregon  

Citation 
Young-Mathews, A. 2012. Plant fact sheet for farewell to 
spring (Clarkia amoena). USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Corvallis Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, OR. 
Published October 2012 
Edited: 25Jan2012 dcd; 17Apr2012 jab; 27Apr2012 dhg   
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

Field of farewell to spring flowering in Corvallis, OR in August, 2011. 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

