AWEOWEO 

Chenopodium oahuense (Meyen) 

Aellen  

Plant Symbol = CHOA 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS Hawaii Plant Materials 
Program 

David Duvauchelle 
USDA NRCS 2003 

  

Alternate Names  
Aheahea,  ahea,  ahewahewa,  alaweo,  alaweo  huna 
(Niihau), kahaihai, goosefoot, pigweed, lamb’s quarters  
  
Uses  
Conservation:   
The  potential  uses  for  aweoweo  include  ecosystem 
restoration,  erosion  control,  and  enhancing  diversity  in 
riparian and other communities.  
  
Wildlife Habitat:   
On Moku Manu, Oahu, sooty terns and red-foot boobies 
use  ‘aweoweo  as  cover  and  also  its  dead  branches  for 
nests.    
  
Hawaiian Cultural:   
During ancient Hawaiian times, Aweoweo wood was used 
to make shark hooks and its leaves were cooked and eaten 
like spinach.  
  
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
  

 

Plant Fact Sheet

the 

Description and Adaptation  
A weakly scented shrub, the aweoweo can reach 5-20m in 
height.    Its  leaves  are  3-lobed  and  somewhat  fleshy.  
Leaves  are  also  pubescent  with  the  bottom  half  more 
pubescent and a lighter green as well.  Flowers are small 
on leafless panicles producing seeds that are dark-brown 
and about 0.8mm in diameter.  
  
Aweoweo is endemic to the Hawaiian Islands.  It can be 
found on the northwestern Hawaiian islands of Lisianski, 
Laysan, French Frigate Shoals, Necker, and Nihoa.  It is 
also  found  throughout  the  main  Hawaiian  Islands,  but 
according  to  the  Manual  of  the  Flowering  Plants  of 
Hawaii  (1999)
,  aweoweo  has  not  been  observed  to  be 
occurring  naturally  on 
island  of  Kahoolawe.  
Aweoweo  is  adapted  to  dry  habitats  of  coastal  and  dry 
forests and can also be found in subalpine shrublands as 
well, ranging in elevation from 0 – 2,520 meters.  
  
Distribution: Please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site.  
  
Establishment  
Aweoweo can be propagated either by seed or by 
vegetative cuttings.  Dibble tubes with sterile planting 
medium are recommended for starting cuttings.  Seedlings 
should be started in 200-cell flats and then transplanted to 
dibble tubes.  Seeds germinate within 5-10 days. 
Propagules should be ready to plant in the field by 5-6 
months after starting in a shade-house.  It is recommended 
that they be placed in direct sunlight about a month before 
planting.  Irrigation is recommended for the first 6 months 
after planting in the field at which time the plants should 
be able to survive simply on natural rainfall.  
  
Management  
Aweoweo  is  a  hardy  plant  that  requires  very  little 
management.  It is well adapted to low rainfall situations 
having a very high drought tolerance.  It can also tolerate 
nutrient depleted soils as well.   Aweoweo does very well 
under cultivation as well.  With the addition of moisture 
and  fertilizer  supplements,  shrubs  are  able  to  grow  with 
relatively high vigor.    
  
Pests and Potential Problems  
There  are  no  known  pests  that  are  detrimental  to  the 
aweoweo life cycle.    
  
Studies show that cultivated aweoweo produces seed with 
very low germination rates.  This is overcome by the fact 
that it produces a large amount of seed.  It is speculated 
that because aweoweo produces seed throughout the year, 
the majority of the seed harvested might be immature.  

 
 

 

 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
Makakupaia Germplasm Aweoweo – Molokai, Hawaii  

 

 

  

David Duvauchelle 
USDA NRCS 2003 

 
Prepared By:   
David Duvauchelle - Natural Resource Specialist  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center  
Hoolehua, Hawaii  

Citation 
Duvauchelle, D. 2009 Plant fact sheet for aweoweo 
(Chenopodium oahuense (Meyen) Aellen). USDA-
Natural Resources Conservation Service, Hawaii Plant 
Materials Center, Hoolehua, Hawaii  96729 

Published  November, 2009 

Edited: 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

