CALIFORNIA HAZELNUT 

Corylus cornuta Marsh. var. 
californica (A. DC.) Sharp 

Plant Symbol = COCOC 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials 
Center 

 

© 2008 Neal Kramer 
Alternative Names 
Alternative common names:  California hazel, California 
filbert, beaked hazelnut, western beaked hazel  
Alternative scientific names:  Corylus californica (A. DC.) 
Rose, Corylus cornuta ssp. californica (A. DC.) E. Murray 
Uses 
Wildlife: California hazelnut is used in hedgerow, riparian and 
wildlife habitat plantings to provide cover and food.  The nuts 
are eaten by many animals including squirrels, chipmunks, 
jays, grouse and pheasant.  Plants may be browsed by mule 
deer and domestic livestock.  
Landscaping: California hazelnut can be incorporated into 
garden plantings or woodland parks.  It is the first native shrub 
to come into bloom in the spring, with attractive yellow 
catkins hanging from the bare branches, and its leaves turn 
bright yellow in the fall.  The Oregon Department of 
Agriculture currently has restrictions on the import and sale of 
all Corylus species within the state in order to control the 
spread of Eastern filbert blight (EFB).  California hazelnut is 
resistant to EFB, but check to see if a ban is in effect in your 
area prior to planting. 
Ethnobotanic: Many Native American tribes of the Pacific 
Northwest and California used the nuts as a food source, 
picking them in late summer to early autumn, storing until 
fully ripe, and then roasting or eating them raw.  The nuts 
were also pounded into cakes containing berries, meat, or 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

animal fat, or boiled to extract the oil, which was used as 
flavoring.  The nuts’ milk was used to cure coughs and colds, 
to heal cuts, and as an astringent.  Roots were used to make a 
bluish dye.  The wood was fashioned into arrows, fishing 
traps, hooks, and spoons, and the long, flexible shoots were 
twisted into rope or used for basketry.  Plants were burned to 
the ground periodically (about every five years) to maintain 
productivity.  The nuts were also used as a trade item among 
tribes because of their sporadic distribution.   
Status 
California hazelnut is listed as a facultative upland species in 
Oregon and Washington, meaning it usually occurs in non-
wetlands, but is occasionally found in wetlands.  Please 
consult the PLANTS Web site and your State Department of 
Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, and 
wetland indicator values). 
Description and Adaptation 
Birch family (Betulaceae): Native, deciduous shrubs or small 
trees growing 3 to 50 feet tall and forming thickets; main 
stems straight, with spreading, ascending branches, and light 
brown twigs that are often glandular-hairy when young.  
Leaves are simple, alternate, often velvety-hairy, paler below 
than above, nearly round to ovate, 1.6-4 inches long, with  
 

doubly toothed margins.  
Male and female flowers 
are separate, but both 
types are present on 
each plant.  Male 
flowers are numerous in 
long, hanging stalks 
(catkins) 2-3 inches 
long, in clusters of 2 or 
3 near branch tips, 
appearing in the fall but 
opening early the 
following spring (Jan.-
Mar.) before leaves 
develop.  Female 
flowers are several in a 
scaly bud, tiny and 
inconspicuous, with 
only bright red stigma 
and styles protruding 
from the otherwise gray-
Reprinted with permission of University of 
Washington Press. 
brown buds near the end 
of the twigs.  Fruit is a hard-shelled, acorn-like nut ½ - ¾ inch 
in diameter, completely concealed by two leafy, coarsely 
toothed, husk-like bracts fused at the tip and forming an 
extended tubular beak.  California hazelnut typically has 
glandular hairs on twigs and petioles and has a shorter husk 

 
 

 

 

beak (beak length usually less than twice nut length), whereas 
the eastern beaked hazelnut (C. cornuta var. cornuta) lacks 
glandular hairs on twigs and petioles and has a longer beak 
(two times or more nut length). , .   The European hazelnut (C. 
avellana) can generally be distinguished from beaked 
hazelnuts by the exposed nuts in the involucral bracts (husks), 
although newer varieties of hazelnuts are being interbred with 
the native hazelnuts and will show intermediate traits. 
California hazelnut does well in full sun to full shade, and 
prefers moist but well-drained, loamy, acid soils with plenty of 
organic matter; it tolerates clay but not saturated soils.  Plants 
are winter hardy to 0°F, and sprout readily from the root 
crown after top-kill by fire or other disturbance.  It typically 
occupies damp rocky slopes and stream banks in the 
understory of coniferous or mixed hardwood forests at 
elevations up to 8000 feet in zones with mean annual 
precipitation of 14 to 100 inches.  Distribution ranges from 
western British Columbia, Washington and Oregon to 
California (see map below).  For updated distribution, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site. 

 

California hazelnut distribution map courtesy of the Flora of North America 
Association. 
Establishment 
Propagation is easiest from seed, but seeds must be harvested 
early, just before they ripen and while husks are still a bit 
green (Jul. to Oct. depending on location), or squirrels will 
harvest the entire crop.  Allow the nuts to ripen and dry before 
sowing; husks will turn brown and can be left on or removed 
before planting.  Sow nuts about 1 inch deep outdoors in the 
fall, or cold stratify for 2-3 months to break seed dormancy 
prior to spring sowing.  There are approximately 410 seeds per 
pound, and seed viability is about one year.  Plants can also be 
vegetatively propagated by transplanting suckers from existing 
plants in late winter or early spring, or layering in the fall by 
nicking a branch, then bending and burying the nick until roots 
form.  In an irrigated sandy loam nursery bed rooting trial, 
hardwood cutting rooting success was about 60% regardless of 
treatment with Wood’s rooting compound (WRC).  In a 
related trial, hardwood cuttings showed poorer performance, 
with only 27% rooting on a greenhouse mist bench (perlite), 

9% rooting on a moderately well-drained silt loam farm field, 
and no rooting in an artificial pond, again with no significant 
effect of WRC.  Results may vary by climate.  
Management 
California hazelnut may need to be watered during the first 
year or two, but requires little management once established.  
Optional pruning to remove suckers and enhance the shape for 
landscape plantings should be done in the winter when plants 
are dormant. 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Eastern filbert blight, caused by the fungus Anisogramma 
anomala, is a growing problem for commercial filbert 
orchards in the Pacific Northwest because of susceptible 
cultivars of the European species C. avellana (common filbert) 
and C. maxima (giant filbert).  Although the native California 
hazelnut is resistant to EFB, at this time the import and sale of 
all Corylus species is under a Control Area Order in Oregon as 
a precaution to prevent spreading the disease. 
Environmental Concerns 
California hazelnut is sometimes treated with herbicides in 
commercially managed forests to reduce interference with 
establishment and growth of conifer seedlings. 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area of 
origin) 
There are no improved cultivars of California hazelnut, but 
seed and container plants are sometimes available from 
commercial sources in Washington and California.  
Prepared By  
Anna Young-Mathews 
Corvallis Plant Materials Center, Corvallis, Oregon 
Citation 
Young-Mathews, A. 2011. Plant fact sheet for California 
hazelnut (Corylus cornuta var. californica). USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Corvallis Plant Materials 
Center, Corvallis, OR. 
Published September 2011 
Edited: [13Aug2011 dcd; 24Aug2011 klp; 06Sep2011 jab, 07Nov2011 aym] 
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation District 
<http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the PLANTS Web site 
<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials Program Web 
site <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

