SUGARBERRY 
Celtis laevigata Willd. 

Plant Symbol = CELA 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 

 

. 

Robert H. Mohlenbrock. USDA SCS, 1989. Midwest wetland flora: 
Field office illustrated guide to plant species. Midwest National 
Technical Center, Lincoln. Courtesy of USDA NRCS Wetland Science 
Institute
 
Alternate Names 
Texas sugarberry, sugar hackberry, hackberry, palo 
blanco, southern hackberry, and lowland hackberry 
 
Uses 
Conservation: Sugarberry is used in native landscaping 
and habitat restorations, and windbreaks. 
 
Ethnobotanic:  Sugarberry was used by a variety of 
Native American tribes.  The Houma used a concentrate 
made from the bark to treat sore throats and a decoction 
made from the bark and ground up shells to treat venereal 
disease.  The Comanche would beat the fruits of 
sugarberry to a pulp.  The pulp was then mixed with 
animal fat, rolled into balls, and roasted in the fire for 
food.  The Acoma, Navajo, and Tewa all consumed the 
berries for food.  The Navajo boiled the leaves and 
branches to make dark brown and red dye for wool. 
 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

Wildlife: Many species of songbirds including 
mockingbirds and robins eat the fruit and use the tree for 
nesting habitat.  It is a larval and nectar host for two 
butterflies: hackberry emperor (Asterocampa celtis) and 
American snout (Libytheana carineta).  White-tailed deer 
browse the leaves and fruit. 
 
Other Uses: Sugarberry is used for furniture, athletic 
goods, firewood, and plywood. It has limited use for 
flooring, creating, and for wood posts.  It is used as an 
ornamental and as a street tree in residential areas in the 
lower South 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description and Adaptation 
Sugarberry is a native tree that can grow up to 80 feet in 
height and up to 3 feet in diameter.  It is a short lived tree, 
probably living not more than 150 years.  It has a broad 
crown formed by spreading branches that are often 
drooped.  The bark is light gray in color and can be 
smooth or covered with corky warts.  The branchlets are 
covered with short hairs at first and eventually they 
become smooth.  The leaves are alternated, simple, and 
slightly serrate.  The leaves are 2-4 inches long and 1 to 2 
inches wide.  The lance-shaped leaves gradually taper to a 
point that is often curved.  They are pale green on both 
the upper and lower surfaces with conspicuous veins.  The 
flowers appear just before or with the leaves in the spring.  
The drupes or fruit have a thick skin and the surface has a 
netlike pattern.  They will range in color from orange to 
reddish-brown.   
 
 Sugarberry is found growing in sandy loam or rocky soils 
along streams, in bottomlands, and in woodlands.    
 
Distribution: Sugarberry ranges south from southeastern 
Virginia to southern Florida, west to central Texas and 
northeastern Mexico, and north to western Oklahoma, 
southern Kansas, Missouri, southern Illinois, southern 
Indiana, and western Kentucky.  It is localized in 
Maryland, the Rio Grande Valley, and northeastern 
Mexico.  Its range overlaps the southern part of the range 
of common hackberry (C. occidentalis). Please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site. 
 

 
 

 

 

 

Establishment 
Sugarberry can be propagated by seed and cuttings.  The 
mature fruits can be picked from late summer until winter.  
Air-dry the fruits with pulp on or soak overnight and rub 
pulp off on a screen.  To stratify, store wet seeds in sealed 
containers in a refrigerator for 60-90 days at 41 degrees.  
Stratified seed can be sown in the spring or you may sow 
non-stratified seed in the fall. Sugarberry can be rooted 
from juvenile wood and from root sprouts or suckers.  
 
Management 
Sugarberry that is top-killed by fire or cut at the base of 
the trunk will re-sprout from the root collar. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
When grown in its native habitat and from local seed 
stock, sugarberry is not prone to debilitating pests. It is 
frequently parasitized by mistletoe.  It appears to be no 
more sensitive to trunk rot than laurel oak (Q. laurifolia
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
'All Seasons' is a fine-textured, small leaf, yellow fall 
color cultivar .which was developed for horticultural use. 
It is probably the only cultivar. Sugarberry is available 
from most nurseries within the species range.  Contact 
your local USDA Natural Resources Conservation 
Service office for more information.    
 
Prepared By:  
Morris J Houck, USDA-NRCS, Plant Materials 
Specialist, Alexandria, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator:  
M. Kat Anderson, USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center, c/o Plant Science Department, University of 
California, Davis, California 
 

). 

Citation 
Houck, M, Anderson, M. 2009  Plant fact sheet for 
sugarberry (Celtis laevigata Willd). USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Louisiana State Office, 
Alexandria, LA  70102 

Published October, 2009 

Edited: 17Sep09 jfl; 17Sep09 mws; 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 
 

 

