FREMONT’S LEATHER 

FLOWER 

Clematis fremontii S. Wats.  

Plant Symbol = CLFR 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Manhattan, Kansas 

 

Mike Haddock, Kansas State University  
 
Fremont’s leather flower was named for Gen. John C. 
Frémont, U.S. Army Corps of Topographical Engineers, 
and famous explorer of the American West, who first 
cataloged this plant in the 1840s.   
 
Alternate Names  
Fremont’s clematis, Fremont’s crowsfoot, Fremont’s 
leather-plant, leatherplant, rattleweed   
 
Uses  
Ornamental:  Fremont’s leather flower has potential as a 
garden plant with its unique, showy, bell or urn-shaped 
flowers, ornamental fruit clusters, interesting texture and 
long period of attractiveness.  It may be planted in large 
groups and is an attractive addition to rock gardens, 
border fronts, native plant gardens, prairies or meadows.  
Fremont’s leather flower combines well with other native 
herbaceous spring bloomers, such as pasque flower and 
prairie smoke.  The dried plants, with fruit clusters and 
foliage intact have potential for dried arrangements.     
 
Status  
CAUTION!! Described as one of our rarest plants, 
Fremont’s leather flower is protected in Missouri.  Please 
consult the PLANTS Web site and your State Department 
of Natural Resources for this plant’s Plant Materials  

 
 

 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

current status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
 
Description and Adaptation   
An herbaceous perennial, non-climbing, shrubby-type 
clematis, with broad ovate leathery green leaves to 5 
inches long with parallel veins, appearing alternate, 
simple, and sessile, on erect stems 12 to 18 inches tall, 
arising from a stout caudex bearing many fibrous roots. 
Thick, non-spreading, often recurved sepals form an inch-
long solitary bell-shaped purple to white flower nodding 
on a slender stalk atop the foliage.  Blooming occurs late 
April into June, giving rise to large clusters of achenes 
each tipped with a long, curled style.  The achenes and 
foliage turn brown in the fall and persist into the winter. 

 

 Large cluster of achenes  
Mike Haddock, Kansas State University 
 
Fremont’s leather flower thrives in full sun on a lean 
alkaline soil.  Although this species naturally occurs on 
rocky prairie sites such as Fort Hays Limestone and 
Smoky Hill Chalk, and on limestone glades in the eastern 
Ozark region, it has been found to be a hardy, very easy to 
grow, long lived garden plant given full sun to part shade 
and rich, well drained soil.  This species is adapted to the 
20 to 24 inch precipitation zone.  Distribution:  Fremont’s 
leather flower is limited in distribution to north central 
Kansas, south central Nebraska and the eastern Ozark 
region of Missouri.  A recent discovery from Tennessee 
near Chattanooga in 2006 and a nearby Georgia 
population has been reported.  For current distribution, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species on 
the PLANTS Web site.   
 
Habitat: Fremont’s leather flower is native to limestone 
prairies and dolomite glades.     
  

Establishment  
Seed may be sown following a three month cold-moist 
stratification period.  The seeds are slow to germinate and 
may lay in the soil medium a month before germinating.    
  
Pests and Potential Problems  
None known  
  
Environmental Concerns   
None  
  
Seeds and Plant Production  
There are approximately 35,290 seeds per pound.  Plants 
grown from seed take two to three years to reach maturity 
and begin flowering.   
  
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) none known  
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office for 
more information.  Look in the phone book under “United 
States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.”  
  
Prepared By and Species Coordinator  
  
John M. Row, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Manhattan, Kansas   

Citation 
Row, J.  2009. Plant fact sheet for Fremont’s leather 
flower (Clematis fremontii S. Watson
Resources Conservation Service, Kansas Plant Materials 
Center, Manhattan, Kansas  66502 
 
Published July, 2009 
Edited: 090611 jsp  

). USDA-Natural 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

