HAIRY SMALL-LEAF 

 
Contributed by: USDA, NRCS, Norman A. Berg National 
Plant Materials Center, Beltsville, MD   

TICKTREFOIL 
Desmodium ciliare  
(Muhl. ex Willd.) DC. 

Plant Symbol = DECI 

 

Larry Allain@USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database 
 
Alternate Names  
Hedysarum ciliare (L.) 
Hedysarum barbatum (L.) 
 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanical: The Houma Indians of Louisiana used an 
infusion of the roots in whiskey to treat weakness and 
cramps. 
Landscaping and wildlife:  Hairy Small-Leaf Ticktrefoil 
attracts birds and is a good grazing and browsing plant for 
livestock.  Hairy Small-Leaf Ticktrefoil enriches the soil 
through nitrogen fixation.  Long-tongued bumblebees 
(Bombus impatiens and Bombus pensylvanicus ) collect 
pollen from the flowers.  Other long-tongued bee 
pollinators include leaf-cutting bees (Megachile brevis 
brevis, Megachile mendica, and Megachile petulans), and 
digger bees (Melissodes bimaculata bimaculata). Short-

 

Plant Fact Sheet

tongued bee pollinators include: sweat bees (Nomia 
nortoni nortoni) and Campus bees (Calliopsis 
andreniformis).  The caterpillars of several skippers feed 
on the leaves:  Hoary Edge (Achalarus lyciades), Silver-
Spotted Skipper (Epargyreus clarus), Southern 
Cloudywing (Thorybes bathyllus), and Northern 
Cloudywing (Thorybes pylades).  The caterpillars of the 
butterfly Eastern Tailed Blue (Everes comyntas) also feed 
on the foliage, while the caterpillars of the butterfly Gray 
Hairstreak (Strymon melinus) eat the flowers and 
developing seedpods.  Other insect feeders include many 
kinds of beetles, and some species of thrips, aphids, moth 
caterpillars, and stinkbugs.  The seeds are eaten by some 
upland game birds (Bobwhite Quail, Wild Turkey) and 
small rodents (White-Footed Mouse, Deer Mouse), while 
the foliage is readily eaten by White-Tailed Deer and 
other hoofed mammalian herbivores.  The Cottontail 
Rabbit also consumes the foliage. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description and Adaptation 
Hairy Small-Leaf Ticktrefoil is a native, perennial, 
wildflower that grows up to 3 feet tall.  The name of the 
genus Desmodium originates from Greek meaning "long 
branch or chain," probably from the shape of the seedpods 
and the way they attach to clothing and animals.  The 
central stem is green with trifoliate (clover-like), oblong, 
compound (made up of multiple green leaflets), green 
leaves proceeding singly up the stem.  The showy purple 
flowers appear in late summer and grow from panicles 
(flowers arranged on a stem) that mature from the bottom 
upwards.  In early fall, the flowers produce leguminous 
seed pods approximately ⅛ inch long.  Hairy Small-Leaf 
Ticktrefoil plants have a single crown.  This wildflower is 
a pioneer species that prefers some disturbance from 
wildfires, selective logging, and other causes.  The sticky 
seedpods cling to the fur of animals and the clothing of 
humans; as a result, the seeds are carried to new locations.  
Hairy Small-Leaf Ticktrefoil grows in upland habitats 
such as forests and savannahs.  It prefers coarse- to 
medium- textured soils that are well-drained. 
 

 
 

 

 

Citation 
Kirk, S. and Belt, S. 2010.  Plant fact sheet for Hairy 
Small-Leaf Ticktrefoil (Desmodium ciliare), USDA-
Natural Resources Conservation Service, Norman A. 
Bern National Plant Materials Center, Beltsville, 20705. 
 

Published October 2010 
 
Edited: (18-Jan-10 SMK, 18-May SVB, 13-Aug-10 JW) 
 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

.

 
 
 

 

 
Hairy Small-Leaf Ticktrefoil distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS 
Database. 
 
For updated distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment 
Gather seeds in the fall and dry them in paper bags for 1 – 
2 weeks.  Sow seeds directly in fall and plant a cover crop 
of a cool season annual grass over the seedbed to protect 
seed over the winter.  If seeds are to be propagated in a 
container, stratify them for approximately 3 months at 34 
to 38 degrees Fahrenheit.  Scarify the seeds before 
planting by rubbing them with sandpaper and inoculate 
them with a Desmodium-specific inoculant.  Cover seeds 
lightly with a vermiculite/perlite mixture and keep air 
temperature at approximately 65 degrees Fahrenheit until 
seeds have germinated.  
 
Management 
Hairy  Small-Leaf  Ticktrefoil  grows  in  partial  shade  and 
prefers neutral to slightly acidic soil and fine- to medium- 
textured soil. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
No known pests or potential problems at this time. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
No concerns at this time. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
There are no recommended cultivars or selected materials 
at this time. 
 
Prepared By  
Samantha Kirk and Shawn Belt, NRCS, Norman A. Berg 
National Plant Materials Center, Beltsville, MD 
 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

