TUFTED HAIRGRASS  
Deschampsia cespitosa (L.) P. Beauv.  

Plant Symbol = DECE 

 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, Oregon  
 

 

Photo by Dale Darris 

 
Alternate names  
Other common names include blue-green hair-grass, 
fescue-leaved hairgrass, salt and pepper grass, 
tussock grass, and canche cespiteuse.   
  
Uses  
Tufted hairgrass is useful for restoring moist to 
seasonally wet prairies and stabilizing disturbed 
sites, streambanks, canals, shorelines, and upper 
tidal marshes. Other applications include acid and 
heavy metal mine spoil reclamation, alpine and 
boreal revegetation work, and bio-filtration swales.  
As a range or pasture grass, it is both a desirable, 
productive forage for cattle and sheep particularly at 
higher elevations, and a species of lesser or low 
value in regions where plants are coarse and less 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

palatable.  The species is sometimes cut for hay.  
Utilization by deer, elk, pronghorn, bison, bear, 
horses, and rabbits is variable.  Likewise, cover and 
food values are rated poor to good for small 
mammals, upland game birds, songbirds, and 
waterfowl depending on wildlife species and 
location. Tufted hairgrass is a larval food plant for 
several butterflies in North America and is host for 
at least 40 species of Lepidopteran insects world-
wide. Varieties have been bred as wear resistant turf 
for golf courses, sports fields and other uses.  
  
Description  
Tufted hairgrass is a highly variable, perennial cool 
season species that grows 20 to 60 in. tall.  Stems are 
erect and the leaves are .06 to .16 in. wide, flat or 
rolled, and mostly basal in a dense tuft.  The panicle 
(seed head or inflorescence) is upright to nodding, 
loosely branched, open, and 4 to 10 in. long. There 
are two florets (flowers) per spikelet. Flowering 
occurs from May to September and seeds mature 
from late June to late September depending on 
location.  
    
Status  
Please consult the Plants Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as state noxious and wetland 
indicator values.  
  
Adaptation  
Populations occupy moderately moist to seasonally 
flooded, sunny to partially shaded environments 
with a wide variety of soil types (fine to coarse, 
mesic to hydric) and pH ranging from 3.5 to 7.5. 
Some populations have extreme tolerance to heavy 
metals and high soil acidity.  Salinity tolerance is 
generally considered low, but plants occurring in 
coastal estuaries may be slightly more salt tolerant.  
Crowns typically survive all but the most severe or 
hottest fires.  

Distribution-As one of the most widely distributed 
grasses on earth, tufted hairgrass is found in many 
arctic and temperate regions. It occurs from sea level 
to 14,000 ft in the mountains.  Habitats include 
coastal terraces, upper tidal marshes, seasonally wet 
prairies, moist subalpine mountain meadows, open 
forests, and alpine areas above timberline. 

 
 

 

Limitations or environmental concerns  
Tufted hairgrass is 
host to a number of 
diseases including 
ergot, several rusts, 
stripe smut, blind 
seed, several leaf 
spots, and the turf 
disease take all patch. 
Insect pests typical of 
pasture and turf 
grasses include 
aphids, billbugs, 
leafhoppers, and 
others. In some parts 
of the world, this 
grass spreads readily 
into newly disturbed 
areas, is a weed in 
certain forage crops, 
and can become a 
serious competitor 
with trees.   
 

 

 

Reprinted with permission Univ. of 
WA Press 

Specific management practices are applied to wet, 
low elevation pastures in Europe in order to control 
it.  The plant is considered nontoxic to livestock and 
humans.  Uses such as general cover and turf can be 
limited by summer moistustress and billbugs.  
 
Establishment   
While the seed (1.1 to 2.5 million seeds/lb) from 
alpine environments may have dormancy and does 
better if fall sown, low elevation sources typically 
have low dormancy and can be fall or spring planted.  
Slow to establish the first year, tufted hairgrass 
originating at low elevations in the Pacific 
Northwest can become large and dominate a site by 
the end of the second growing season if sown 
heavily (2 to 3 lbs of pure live seed/ac).  Where 
species diversity is a goal, space for forbs and other 
grasses may require that seed mixes contain no more 
than ¼ to ½ lb of tufted hairgrass seed per acre. Turf 
varieties are sown at 1 to 2 lbs/1000 sq. ft. Light 
enhances germination so seeds should be only 
lightly covered (¼ in.). Choose seed originating 
from the same region and a similar elevation range 
(low, mid, or high).  Specific populations are often 

 

required for extreme soils (acid, metals). 
Depauperate sties may need mulch and fertilizer.   
Grazing management- Once established, use a 
rotational, moderate grazing system since the species 
often declines with continuous, season long use. 
Defer grazing each spring until soils are dry enough 
to prevent damage to soils and plants. Also, 
postpone livestock utilization for a year or more 
after fire to allow recovery.    
  
Improved cultivars and selected materials (and 
area of origin)  
The NRCS in Oregon released the pre-varieties 
Tillamook Germplasm for revegetation use in 
coastal zones of Oregon and Washington, and 
Willamette Germplasm for use in western interior 
valleys of the same states. Reclamation cultivars 
include ‘Peru Creek’ from Colorado for use in 
certain Rocky Mountain habitats, and ‘Nortran’ for 
use in parts of Alaska. Given the fine wispy seed 
heads and natural beauty of the plant, 20 or more 
ornamental varieties are found in the landscape and 
nursery trade. Seed companies have developed at 
least eight proprietary turf varieties from European 
sources that reportedly tolerate more shade and 
mowing down to 1/3 to 1/2 in.  
  
Prepared by  
Dale Darris and Pete Gonzalves, USDA NRCS Plant 
Materials Center, Corvallis, Oregon.  
  
Species coordinator  
Dale Darris, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, Oregon.  

Published: October 2009 

Edited:  

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 
 

 

