SALTGRASS 

DISTICHLIS SPICATA 

(L.) GREENE  
Plant Symbol = DISP 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS Cape May Plant Materials 
Center 

 

Photo by William Skaradek USDA NRCS 
 
Alternate Names 
Inland saltgrass, seashore saltgrass, spike grass and alkali 
grass. 
 
Uses 
Livestock: Under favorable soil and moisture conditions, 
studies have shown Saltgrass favorable for pastures 
irrigated with saline water. The total dry matter yields 
were 9081 kg/ha with a total protein production of 1300 
kg/ha.  Saltgrass is grazed by both cattle and horses and it 
has a forage value of fair to good because it remains green 
when most other grasses are dry during the drought 
periods and it is resistant to grazing and trampling.  It is 
cropped both when green and in the dry state; however, it 
is most commonly used the winter for livestock feed.  
Saltgrass along the Atlantic coast was the primary source 
of hay for the early colonists. 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

Wildlife
: Saltgrass is a larval foodplant for the Wandering 
Skipper (Panoquina panoquinoides errans) butterfly. It is 
also an important food in the diet of waterfowl and the 
Florida salt marsh vole (Microtus pennsylvanicus 
dukecampbelli), which is on the Endangered and 
Threatened Species List of Southeastern United States. 
Ducks are reported to occasionally eat the dried seeds and 
controlled burning provides tender forages for wild geese. 
Distichlis spicata is significant in the salt marshes, which 
provide nesting grounds for birds, fish and larvae of many 
species of marine invertebrate animals. As salt marsh 
plants decompose, their stored nutrients provide a steady 
source of food for clams, crabs, and fish. 
 
Wetland Restoration: The thick entangled roots of salt 
marsh plants acts as a guard between the ocean and the 
shore protecting the land from pollutants and other 
chemicals associated with runoff water.  It is particularly 
useful in saline/alkaline wetlands. 
 
Medicine: Saltgrass is a respiratory allergenic plant that is 
offered by Miles Pharmaceutical and used by Florida 
physicians to treat respiratory allergies. 
 
Spice: Indians that inhabited California used saltgrass as a 
seasoning.  They collected the salt crystals by threshing 
the blades.  The seasoning provided is gray-green and said 
to have tasted like a salty dill pickle. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description  
Saltgrass is a native perennial from 15” to 35” in height.  
It forms dense mats with rhizomes and sometimes stolons.  
It is a dioecious species with male and female 
reproductive parts on separate plants. 
 
It is widespread and in the eastern United States is most 
commonly found along estuaries and the troughs of back 
dune areas along the shorelines. 
 
Distribution: Please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment 
Adaptation: Saltgrass is found in saline areas, brackish 
marshes, and in salt flats along the coasts of the Atlantic 
and Pacific Oceans, the Gulf of Mexico and the along the 
coast of South America.  It inhabits upper/high marsh 

 
 

 

(irregularly flooded) areas, in which the water levels vary 
between 2 inches above the soil surface and 6 inches 
below the soil surface.  It is also commonly present in the 
dry West, where it is one of the most drought-tolerant 
species.  Saltgrass is located in both organic alkaline and 
in saline soils.  It is found in planting zones 7,8,9,and 10.  
Distichlis spicata can be found in flower from June to 
October.  The inflorescence is yellowish in color, turning 
straw brown as it dries. 
 
General: It may be propagated by seeds, which are 
produced many times in a growing season and are 
dispersed by wind and water.  It is easier and more often 
propagated by its extensively creeping underground 
rhizomes.  
 
Rhizomes: Saltgrass can be established by seeds or by 
rhizome cuttings.  If using rhizome cuttings, they must 
not dry out.  They may be stored up to 28 days.  It is 
recommended that the rhizomes be stored in a 
temperature range of 35-50° F and in 60-75% relative 
humidity.  Rhizomes are can be planted any time of the 
year at a depth of 1-2 inches.  However, rhizomes sprout 
better at 77-86° F. 
 
Seeds: Saltgrass seeds demand more than rhizomes to 
sprout.  The seeds need moist soil, low alkalinity and high 
temperatures.  Although many seeds are produced, only a 
small percentage of those seeds may germinate naturally.   
 
Management 
Saltgrass can be managed by burning between September 
1 and February 1 biannually, when the water level 
exceeds the soil surface.  Following burning, four inches 
of re-growth should be obtained before grazing is 
allowed. Water control systems may need to be installed 
to maintain correct water levels to avoid prolong 
inundation, which kills saltgrass. Cattle walkways are 
usually installed to make the forage more accessible. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Saltgrass is the alternate host for the red rust (Puccinia 
aristidae, also known as Puccinia subnitens) that infects 
spinach. Although the red rust disease is difficult for 
shippers to detect, it grows rapidly during transit. Since 
little is known about this disease, there are no 
recommended control techniques.  Saltgrass eradication 
has been the only method used so far because the 
pathogen cannot complete its life cycle without this 
alternate host plant.    
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
‘LK517f saltgrass’ is a California native, perennial, 
warm season grass with extensive creeping, yellowish, 
scaly rhizomes forming large colonies. 
Establishment should be in late spring using rhizomes or 
plugs planted on one-foot centers. Irrigation water should 
be applied the first summer to ensure stand establishment. 

 

 

LK517f is used for riparian restoration and bank and 
shoreline stabilization. 
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office for 
more information.  Look in the phone book under ”United 
States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 

Photo by William Skaradek depicting low growing, matted 
growth form. 
 

 

Photo by William Skaradek depicting the groups of seed heads. 
 

 

Photo of seed head close-up by William Skaradek 
 

 

Prepared By:  
William Skaradek  
USDA NRCS and  
Christopher Miller  
USDA NRCS Cape May Plant Materials Center 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Christopher Miller 
 
Published:  June 2010 
 
Edited:  
Robert Glennon 
James Henson 
Mark Skinner 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

