WESTERN PRAIRIE 

CLOVER 

 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Pullman, Washington 

Dalea ornata (Douglas) Eaton & 

Wright  

Plant Symbol = DAOR2 

Kishor Bhattarai, Utah State University 

 

Alternate Names 
Alternative common names:  Blue Mountain prairie 
clover, showy prairie clover, ornate dalea 
 
Alternative scientific names:  Petalostemon ornatus 
Douglas ex. Hook, Petalostemon ornatum Douglas, 
Kuhnistera ornata (Douglas) Kuntze, Petalostemon 
lagopus Rydb., Petalostemon ornatum forma pallidus H. 
St. John 

Uses 
Rangeland revegetation: Western prairie clover can be 
used in seeding mixes for diversification and revegetation 
of rangelands.   
 
Forage:  Western prairie clover is a non-toxic legume and 
has the potential for increasing forage production and 
quality (Bhattarai et al. 2009). 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

Pollinator habitat: Dalea ornata attracts native bee fauna 
as well as managed agricultural pollinators.   

Beautification:  This plant is an excellent choice for 
beautification of roadsides, rest areas and parks. 

Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Description and Adaptation 
General: Legume family (Fabaceae).  Western prairie 
clover is a perennial, herbaceous North American legume 
that grows to 12 – 24 inches in height.  It has a cluster of 
stems that arise from a taproot.  Dried stems are also 
usually present from previous years.  Leaves are alternate 
and odd-pinnate, comprised of 5 – 7 oval shaped leaflets.  
Leaves and stems are dotted with tiny glands.  Flowers 
occur in dense, cylinder-shaped spikes, are light pink to 
purple in color and have 5 petals.  The flowers bloom 
upward along the spike May – July.  Seedpods are closed 
and contain 1 or 2 seeds.   
 
Distribution: Western prairie clover is native to 
southeastern Washington, western Idaho, eastern Oregon, 
northern California and northwestern Nevada.  It is 
relatively uncommon.   
 

 
Western prairie clover distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS 
Database 

For updated distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 

 
 

 

 

Habitat: Western prairie clover is found in sagebrush-
steppe habitats in the southern Columbia Plateau, the Blue 
Mountains and the northern Great Basin.  It is adapted to 
low to moderate elevations and is characteristic of soft 
clay and sandy soils derived from weathering of basalt 
and volcanic ash (Barneby 1977).   

Establishment 
To establish a planting, the seed must first be scarified 
using sandpaper or a laboratory scarifying device.  Seed 
also can be scarified by soaking in 98% sulfuric acid, 
rinsed with water and air-dried.  The seed should be 
planted with a drill into a prepared, firm, weed-free seed 
bed at a depth of ¼ - ½ inch and at a rate of 4 – 5 pounds 
Pure Live Seed (PLS) per acre.  If the seed is planted in a 
mix, the seeding rate should be adjusted according to the 
proportion of the mix. If the seed is broadcast, the seeding 
rate should be doubled.  To improve the plant's ability to 
establish and fix nitrogen, the seed should be inoculated 
with the proper Rhizobium bacteria strain prior to 
planting. 

Management 
In all native forb plantings, weeds must be managed for 
several years to ensure successful establishment.  
Integrated Pest Management (IPM) techniques such as 
herbicide use and mowing could be used. 

Pests and Potential Problems 
Seedlings of Dalea ornata may be damaged by rodents 
and insects. 

Environmental Concerns 
This plant does not appear to spread aggressively by seed 
or vegetative means. 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
None 
 
References 
Barneby, R.C.  1977.  Daleae imagines.  Memoirs of the 

New York Botanical Garden 27:1-892. 

Bhattarai, K., B.S. Bushman, D.A. Johnson and J.G. 

 

Carman.  2009.  Characterization of the population 
structures in the wildland collections of Dalea ornata 
and D. searlsiae from the western U.S.  Society for 
Range Management 62nd Annual Meeting, 
Alberquerque, NM, 2009. Paper No. 1000-6. 
[Online]. Available at 
http://www.srmmeetings.org/pdf_Abstracts/pstrA100
0_Ecology/1000_6.pdf (Accessed 29 October 2009).  
USDA-ARS, Logan, UT.   

Burke Museum of Natural History and Culture.  [Online]. 

Available at 
http://biology.burke.washington.edu/herbarium/imag
ecollection.php?Genus=Dalea&Species=ornata. 

(Accessed 29 Oct 2009). University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA. 

Davis, R.J. 1952. Flora of Idaho. W.M.C. Brown 

Company, Dubuque, IA. 

Hitchcock, C.L. and A. Cronquist. 1973. Flora of the 

Pacific Northwest. University of Washington Press, 
Seattle, WA. 

USDA-ARS. 2009.  Improved Plant Genetic Resources 

for Pastures and Rangelands in the Temperate 
Semiarid Regions of the Western U.S.  2009 Annual 
Report. [Online]. Available at 
http://afrsweb.usda.gov/research/projects/projects.ht
m?ACCN_NO=412652 (Accessed 29 Oct 2009). 
USDA-ARS, Logan, UT. 

Prepared By 
Pamela Scheinost, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Pullman, Washington 
 
Douglas A. Johnson, USDA ARS Forage and Range 
Research Laboratory, Logan, Utah 
 
James H. Cane, USDA ARS Pollinating Insects Research 
Unit, Logan, Utah 

Citation 
Scheinost, P., D.A. Johnson and J.H. Cane. 2009.  Plant 
fact sheet for western prairie clover (Dalea ornata).  
USDA-Natural Resources Conservation Service, Pullman 
Plant Materials Center.  Pullman, WA. 

Published November 2009 

Edited: 13nov2009 jhc; 13nov2009 daj;17 nov2009ps; 20Nov2009 jb; 
3Dec2009 ps 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

