PANICLEDLEAF 
TICKTREFOIL 

Desmodium paniculatum (L.) DC. 

Plant Symbol = DEPA6 

Contributed by: USDA, NRCS, Norman A. Berg National 
Plant Materials Center, Beltsville, MD  

 

 

Photo by Rick Mark rick.mark@comcast.net image used with permission 
 
Alternate Names 
Panicled Tick Trefoil 
Uses 
Ethnobotanical: The Houma Indians of Louisiana used an 
infusion of the roots in whiskey to treat weakness and 
cramps. 
Landscaping and wildlife:  Panicledleaf Ticktrefoil 
attracts birds and is a good grazing and browsing plant for 
livestock.  Panicledleaf Ticktrefoil enriches the soil 
through nitrogen fixation.  Long-tongued bumblebees 
(Bombus impatien and Bombus pensylvanica ) collect 
pollen from the flowers.  Other long tongued bee 
pollinators include leaf-cutting bees (Megachile brevis 
brevis, Megachile mendica, and Megachile petulans ), and 
digger bees (Melissodes bimaculata bimaculata ). Short 
tongued bee pollinators include: sweat bees (Nomia 
nortoni nortoni) and Campus bees (Calliopsis 
andreniformis). The caterpillars of several skippers feed 
on the leaves: Hoary Edge (Achalarus lyciades), Silver-
Spotted Skipper (Epargyreus clarus), Southern 
Cloudywing (Thorybes bathyllus), and Northern 
Cloudywing (Thorybes pylades).  The caterpillars of the 
butterfly Eastern Tailed Blue (Everes comyntas) also feed 
on the foliage, while the caterpillars of the butterfly Gray 

 
 

 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

 

Hairstreak (Strymon melinus) eat the flowers and 
developing seedpods. Other insect feeders include many 
kinds of beetles, and some species of thrips, aphids, moth 
caterpillars, and stinkbugs.  The seeds are eaten by some 
upland gamebirds (Bobwhite Quail, Wild Turkey) and 
small rodents (White-Footed Mouse, Deer Mouse), while 
the foliage is readily eaten by White-Tailed Deer and 
other hoofed mammalian herbivores. The Cottontail 
Rabbit also consumes the foliage. 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
Description and Adaptation  
Panicledleaf Ticktrefoil is a native, perennial, wildflower 
that grows up to 3 feet tall. The genus Desmodium: 
originates from Greek meaning "long branch or chain," 
probably from the shape and attachment of the seedpods.  
The central stem is green with clover-like, oblong, 
multiple green leaflets proceeding singly up the stem.  
The showy purple flowers appear in late summer and 
grow arranged on a stem maturing from the bottom 
upwards.  In early fall, the flowers produce leguminous 
seed pods approximately ⅛ inch long.  Panicledleaf 
Ticktrefoil plants have a single crown.  This wildflower is 
a pioneer species that prefers some disturbance from 
wildfires, selective logging, and others causes.  The sticky 
seedpods cling to the fur of animals and the clothing of 
humans and are carried to new locations. 

Figure 1  Panicledleaf Ticktrefoil distribution 
from USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database. 

 

 

 

 F until seeds have germinated.   

 
For updated distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.   
Panicledleaf Ticktrefoil grows in upland habitats such as 
forests and savannahs. It prefers coarse to medium 
textured, well drained soils, growing from Maine south to 
Florida and east to Texas and Nebraska.  
Establishment 
Gather seeds in the fall and dry them in paper bags for 1 – 
2 weeks.  Sow seeds directly in fall and plant a cover crop 
of a cool season annual grass over the seedbed to protect 
seed over the winter.  If seeds are to be propagated in a 
container, stratify them for approximately 3 months at 34o 
to 38o F.  Scarify the seeds before planting by rubbing 
them with sandpaper and inoculate them with a 
Desmodium-specific inoculant.  Cover seeds lightly with a 
vermiculite/perlite mixture and keep air temperature at 
approximately 65o
Management 
Panicledleaf Ticktrefoil grows in partial shade and prefers 
neutral to slightly acidic soil, fine to medium textured 
soil.  
Pests and Potential Problems 
No known pests or potential problems at this time. 
Environmental Concerns 
No concerns at this time. 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
There are no recommended cultivars or selected materials 
at this time. 
Prepared By: Samantha Kirk and Shawn Belt, NRCS, 
National Plant Materials Center, Beltsville, MD 
Citation 
Kirk, S. and Belt, S. 2009.  Plant fact sheet for 
Panicledleaf Ticktrefoil (Desmodium paniculatum), 
USDA-Natural Resources Conservation Service, Norman 
A. Berg National Plant Materials Center, Beltsville, 
20705. 
 

Published: January 2010 
 
Edited: (10-Nov-2009 SMK, 12 Dec -2009 SVB, 16-Dec 
2009 JW, Dec 16-2009RG) 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov>.

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

