VELVET 

BUNDLEFLOWER 

Desmanthus velutinus Scheele 

Plant Symbol = DEVE2 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS James E. “bud” Smith 
Plant Materials Center, Knox City, Texas 

  

 
Uses  
Wildlife:  Velvet bundleflower is consumed by large and 
small wildlife.  Deer and other browsing animals can feed 
on the young, tender foliage.  The numerous seed 
produced by the plant are utilized by many species, 
especially quail.  
  
Livestock:  Velvet bundleflower has a good forage value 
for sheep and goats while the foliage is young and tender.  
After seed begins to form, the forage value becomes fair 
for all livestock.  
  
Erosion Control:  Velvet bundleflower can be planted 
along field borders, railroads, and other sloping areas to 
reduce soil erosion from both water and wind.  
  
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site 
(http://plants.usda.gov) and your State Department of 
Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g. 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).  
  
Weediness   
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation 
if not properly managed.  Please consult your local NRCS 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service office, state 
natural resource, or state agriculture department regarding 
its status and use.  Weed information is also available 
from the PLANTS Web site at 
.  Please consult this and 
http://www.plants.usda.gov
Related Web Sites and view the plant profile for this 
species for further information.  
  
Description  
Velvet bundleflower is a native, warm-season, perennial 
legume.  The plant is composed of several widely 
spreading, smooth stems that grow two feet long.  Velvet 
bundleflower produces a white “powder-puff” cluster 
shaped flower, one inch in diameter, between the months 
of April and June.  The leaves are three to four inches 
long with a bluish-green tint.  Numerous leaflets 
positioned twice pinnate make up the leaves of the velvet 
bundleflower.  The seed from the velvet bundleflower 
grows in straight pods two to three inches long, and fully 
matures from mid July to late August.    
  
Adaptation  
Velvet bundleflower is widely adapted throughout central, 
south, and west Texas, as well as southern Oklahoma.  It 
prefers calcareous and limestone soils.  Velvet 
bundleflower does not adapt well to heavily wooded areas 
or areas that tend to remain wet for extended periods of 
time.  
  
Distribution: Please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site.  
  
Establishment  
Velvet bundleflower should be planted on a clean, firm 
seedbed.  Planting can be done using either a grass drill or 
broadcast seeder, but grass drills are the most successful 
method of planting velvet bundleflower.  Seed should be 
placed ¼ inch deep.  Soil samples should be taken before 
planting to determine the amount of fertilizer needed to 
bring the fertility level up to a medium range.  Limit 
nitrogen application to ten pounds per acre or less until 
the stand is established.  Velvet bundleflower should be 
planted at a rate of 4.5 lbs pure live seed (pls) per acre. 
When planting this as a component of a seed mixture, the 
seeding rate should be adjusted to the desired percent of 
the mix.   
 
 Management  
Velvet bundleflower is commonly found as a component 
in  seed  mixtures  for  range  seeding  and  conservation 
cover.    Stands  of  velvet  bundleflower  should  be  well 
established before livestock is permitted to  graze.  Once 
the stand is established, velvet bundleflower should never 

 
 

 

 

Prepared By: 
Brandon Carr, USDA NRCS James E. “Bud” Smith Plant 
Materials Center, Knox City, Texas  
  
Species Coordinator: 

Published November 2009 

Edited:  

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

.

be grazed or cut below six inches.  Velvet bundleflower 
does  not  tolerate  continuous  grazing  or  heavy  overuse.  
Soil tests should be conducted regularly to determine the 
amount of fertilizer needed to maintain a medium level of 
fertility.  
  
Proper management of velvet bundleflower is required to 
ensure  the  plant  is  not  overgrazed  or  over  utilized  by 
livestock  or  wildlife.    Consult  your  local  NRCS  Field 
Office  for  assistance  with  planning  and  applying 
prescribed grazing.  
  
Control   
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use it safely.  Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method.  Trade names 
and control measures appear in this document only to 
provide specific information.  USDA NRCS does not 
guarantee or warranty the products and control methods 
named, and other products may be equally effective.  
  
Pest and Potential Problems  
None known  
  
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
Hondo Germplasm was released from the James E. “Bud” 
Smith Plant Materials Center, Knox City, TX in 2003.  It 
was collected originally in 1969 from native plants in the 
eastern part of Medina County, near Hondo, TX, and 
released to provide an adapted forb for inclusion in range 
mixes for wildlife and livestock browse.  
 

USDA NRCS 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

