PURPLE PRAIRIE 

CLOVER  

Dalea purpurea Vent. var. purpurea   

Plant Symbol = DAPUP 

 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS James E. “Bud” Smith 
Plant Materials Center, Knox City, Texas  

 

USDA NRCS  
 
Uses  
Erosion Control:  Purple prairie clover is used in a 
mixture with grass and forbs to prevent soil erosion on 
dam structures, roadsides, and other critical erodible 
areas.    
  
Wildlife:  Purple prairie clover is readily consumed by 
many types of wildlife.  During early growth stages, its 
foliage is consumed due to its high nutritional value.  
Purple prairie clover seed is consumed by birds and small 
mammals.  The purple flowers also attract many different 
species of pollinators such as bees and butterflies.   
  
Livestock: Purple prairie clover can be grazed by 
livestock, primarily sheep and goats.  This plant is highly 
palatable and nutritious.  
  
Landscaping/Beautification:  Purple prairie clover is used 
in wildlife gardens, parks, prairie restorations, and 
recreation areas.  
  
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site 
(http://plants.usda.gov) and your State Department of 
Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g. 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).  

 

Plant Fact Sheet

  
Weediness   
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation 
if not properly managed.  Please consult your local NRCS 
Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service office, state 
natural resource, or state agriculture department regarding 
its status and use.  Weed information is also available 
from the PLANTS Web site at 
.  Please consult this and 
http://www.plants.usda.gov
Related Web Sites and view the plant profile for this 
species for further information.  
  
Description   
Purple prairie clover is a native, warm-season, perennial 
legume.  The plant has one to many stems that grow up to 
2.5 feet long from a woody, stout taproot that branches 
near the surface.  The leaves are about one inch long and 
very narrow.  They alternate and have an average of five 
leaflets per pinnate compound.  The flowers appear on the 
end of the stems and have cylindrical floral spikes about 
two inches long.  The flowers open beginning at the base 
of the flower head and progress up to the tip.  Seed is 
produced in a seed pod about ½ inch long.  The seed pod 
will contain between one to two seed each.  Purple prairie 
clover blooms from April to June with the seed maturing 
from mid July to late August   
  
Adaptation  
Purple prairie clover is adapted to slopes along hillsides, 
prairies, and plains.  The plant is widely distributed 
throughout central, south, and west Texas.  It occurs 
mostly on sandy, sandy loam, and other moderately 
drained soils  
 

 
Purple prairie clover area of distribution from PLANTS 
database. 

 
 

 

 

 

 

USDA NRCS  
 
Prepared By:   
Brandon Carr, USDA NRCS James E. “Bud” Smith Plant 
Materials Center, Knox City, Texas  
  
Species Coordinator:   

Citation 
Carr, B. 2009 Plant Fact Sheet for purple prairie clover 
(Dalea purpurea Vent. var. purpurea). USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, James E. “Bud” Smith 
Plant Materials Center, Knox City, Texas  79529  
 
Published November, 2009 

Edited:  

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

 
Distribution: Please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site.  
  
Establishment  
Purple prairie clover should be planted on a clean, firm 
seedbed.  Planting can be done using either a grass drill or 
broadcast seeder, but grass drills are the most successful 
method of planting.  Seed should be placed ½ to ¼ inch 
deep.  Purple prairie clover should be planted at a rate of 
3 lbs pure live seed (pls) per acre. When planting this as a 
component of a seed mixture, the seeding rate should be 
adjusted to the desired percent of the mix.  
 
Management  
Purple prairie clover is commonly found as a component 
in  seed  mixtures  for  range  seeding  and  conservation 
cover.  Stands should be well established before livestock 
grazing  is  permitted.    The  plant  does  not  tolerate 
continuous  grazing  or  heavy  overuse. 
  Proper 
management of purple prairie clover is required to ensure 
the plant is not overgrazed or over utilized by livestock or 
wildlife.    Consult  your  local  NRCS  Field  Office  for 
assistance with planning and applying prescribed grazing.  
Soil tests should be conducted regularly to determine the 
amount of fertilizer needed to maintain a medium level of 
fertility.  
  
Pests and Potential Problems  
None known  
  
Environmental Concerns  
None known  
  
Control   
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use it safely.  Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method.  Trade names 
and control measures appear in this document only to 
provide specific information.  USDA NRCS does not 
guarantee or warranty the products and control methods 
named, and other products may be equally effective.  
  
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
Cuero Germplasm was released from the James E. “Bud” 
Smith Plant Materials Center, Knox City, TX in 2003.  It 
was collected originally in 1970 from native plants in 
DeWitt County, TX approximately 11 miles from the 
town of Cuero.

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

