VELVET PANICUM 
Dichanthelium scoparium  

(Lam.) Gould 
Plant Symbol = DISC3 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS East Texas Plant Materials 
Center 

 Melinda Brakie - NRCS  

 

 Alternate Names  
Velvet rosettegrass and broom panic-grass are two other 
names for this plant.  

Uses  
Potential uses of velvet panicum include revegetation of 
disturbed areas. This specie provides a source of food for 
songbirds, small mammals, and game birds. The basal 
rosettes provide winter forage for wild turkey and white 
tailed deer.  

Status  
Throughout the adaptation area of the United States, 
velvet panicum is identified as either a facultative (FAC-
equally likely to occur in wetlands or non-wetlands) or 
facultative wetland (FACW- usually occurs in wetlands, 
but occasionally found as a non-wetlands) plant. Please 
consult the PLANTS Web site and your State Department 
of Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g. 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator value.  

 

 

 
 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

 Description and Adaptation  
 
This species is distinguished from other North American 
grasses by its unique growth pattern. A basal rosette is 
produced during fall and winter with stems developing in 
the spring.  

Winter basal rosette 

 

Velvet panicum is a native perennial bunchgrass that 
actively grows during the summer. However, the plant’s 
lifespan is considered to be short when compared to other 
perennial plants. It has erect coarse stems up to 4.5 feet 
tall. The gray-green stems and leaves are covered with 
fine hairs. The leaves are .25 to 1.0 inch wide. Velvet 
panicum tends to flower later than the other 
Dichanthelium species if they are present in a stand. 
There are approximately 380,000 seeds per pound.  

Velvet panicum is adapted to the eastern United States 
from New York to Florida west to Kansas and Texas. In 
East Texas, this plant is predominantly found in woods 
and post oak savannahs. This adaptation area corresponds 
to USDA Hardiness Zones 5b to 10b. Velvet panicum 
grows in areas with precipitation ranging from 30 to 55 
inches. It prefers coarse and medium textured soils with 
pH range of 4.5 to 7.5. Velvet panicum is not tolerant of 
salinity. This plant is found in sandy woods, low areas, 
and disturbed sites. 

 Establishment  
Fertilize planting area according to soil test for 
establishment. Maintain fertility levels at medium 
conditions and soil pH near 6.0. To reduce weed 
competition, do not over apply nitrogen.  
Plant the seed at a rate of 3.0 pure live seed pounds per 
acre in the fall when the ground is moist. Drill or hand 
plant seeds at a depth of ½” or less. If broadcasting, use a 
cultipacker to increase seed to soil contact.  

Management  
If managing as a planting: Do not over apply nitrogen 
fertilizer or keep soil fertility at a high level. Seed 
production maybe decreased by high fertility levels. 

 
 

 

When managing for seed production, mow in the spring to 
clip off previous year’s growth. 
 
Summer seed harvest is completed using a flail vac or 
combine. The flail vac harvests the mature seed without 
harming the plants; therefore multiple harvests can be 
completed on the same seed production field. At the East 
Texas PMC, summer flail vac harvesting produced 60 
pounds of cleaned seed per acre.  
 
The fall produced seeds are found in the spikelet sheath 
and can be harvested with a combine.  
 
Seed is cleaned using a two screen air seed cleaner with a 
6/64 top screen and a 1/23 bottom screen with very little 
air flow. 

Pests and Potential Problems  
If managing for seed production, velvet panicum will 
hybridize with tapered rosettegrass (D. acuminatum) and 
cypress panicgrass (D. dichotomum).  

Environmental Concerns  
This plant is considered an endangered species in Indiana. 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  

Control  
Velvet panicum spreads slowly by seed. Please contact 
your local agricultural extension specialist or county weed 
specialist to learn what works best in your area and how 
to use it safely. Always read label and safety instructions 
for each control method.  

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
Pilgrim Germplasm velvet panicum (D. scoparium), 
released in 2007 by the East Texas Plant Materials Center, 
is a selected class for wildlife and critical area seedings. 
The intended area of use for this release is the 
southeastern United States.  

 

Prepared By  
Melinda Brakie, East Texas Plant Materials Center 

Citation 

Brakie, M.  2007. Plant fact sheet for velvet panicum 
Dichanthelium scoparium (Lam.) Gould.  USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, East Texas Plant 
Materials Center, Nacogdoches, TX  75964. 
Published September 2007 

Edited: 120911mb 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

