 

 

 

 

CLAY-LOVING WILD 

BUCKWHEAT 

Eriogonum pelinophilum         

Reveal 

Plant Symbol = ERPE10 

Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Colorado Plant Materials 
Program 

  Plant Fact Sheet

Description and Adaptation 
General: Buckwheat family (Polygonaceae).  Clay-loving 
wild buckwheat is a long-lived low-growing, spreading 
sub-shrub, reaching up to 4 inches (10 centimeters) in 
height and 12 in (30 cm) across.  “Stems are spreading 
without persistent leaf bases up to 1/3 the height of the 
plant; aerial flowering stems spreading to erect, slender, 
leaves, 1 per node” .  Leaves are dark green and appear 
needle-like with in-rolled margins.  Flowers are white to 
cream with reddish-brown midribs and brownish-red 
bases, (Figure 2), petals all the same length.  Fruits are 
achenes, light brown, 0.1 in (0.3 to 0.35 cm) and 
triangular in cross-section. Flowering occurs late May to 
early September.  
 

Figure1:  Clay-loving wild buckwheat, Eriogonum pelinophilum..  
 Photo USFWS, Alicia Langton July 2010. 

 

Alternative Names 
N/A 

Uses 
Pollinators: Clay-loving wild buckwheat flowers are 
visited by more than 50 species of pollinators in a season.  
Roughly half of these 50 species are native bees, and 18 
species are native ants .  The USFWS and others have 
noted, that of all Eriogonum species studied to date, none 
has as many pollinators as clay-loving wild buckwheat. 

Status 
Clay-loving wild buckwheat was designated as 
endangered, with critical habitat, by the USFWS in 1984. 
 
The NatureServe conservation status rank an international 
effort which rank species on their “global” status, denotes 
clay-loving wild buckwheat as G2/S2- globally imperiled 
and statewide imperiled, with a high risk of extinction due 
to very restricted range, very few populations (often 20 or 
fewer), steep declines, or other factors. 
 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

 

Clay-loving buckwheat distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS 
Database. 
 
Distribution:  Clay-loving wild buckwheat is endemic to 
the rolling clay (adobe) hills and flats immediately 
adjacent to the communities of Delta and Montrose, of 
west-central Colorado.   
 
Habitat:   The habitat of clay-loving wild buckwheat 
consists of adobe clay badland hills and flats within the 
sparsely vegetated desert shrub community.  This plant 
community includes the following clay-loving buckwheat 
plant associates:  mat saltbush (Atriplex corrugata), black 
sagebrush (Artemesia nova), shadscale (Atriplex 
confertifolia), Gardner’s saltbush, (Atriplex gardneri), 
bud sagebrush (Picrothamnus desertorum), charming 
woodyaster, (Xylorhiza venusta), and Adobe Hills 
beardtongue (Penstemon retrorsus).   
 
 

 

Adaptation  
Clay-loving wild buckwheat is adapted to the harsh 
growing conditions that include clay, alkaline, and 
calcareous soils of the Mancos shale formation, unique to 
west-central Colorado.  The Mancos shale formation has 
been associated with high salts and selenium, however no 
selenium accumulation information related to clay-loving 
wild buckwheat is known at this time.  At elevations 
ranging from 5,180 to 6,350 ft., clay-loving wild 
buckwheat is generally found growing on the mid to 
lower slopes of the rolling topography of the adobe 
Mancos shale hills, also occurring in swales or drainages.   
With an average annual total precipitation of 7-10 inches, 
clay-loving wild buckwheat is dependent upon the 
microclimates created by the small areas where snow 
lingers longer due to aspect, topography, and landscape 
position. 

For updated distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 

Establishment 
Clay-loving wild buckwheat requires an insect pollinator 
in order to set seed, for both outcrossing and self-
pollination (within a plant but not within a flower).  
O’Kane in 1985 stated that “seed dispersal is usually 
passive, either being consumed or carried by animals, 
windblown, or moved by gravity or water.”  “All 
Eriogonum species studied thus far have seeds that 
require a cold period to break dormancy (not necessarily a 
freeze), and some Eriogonum species have seeds with a 5-
year shelf life.” 
 

Management 
Clay-loving wild buckwheat occurrences and suitable 
habitat continue to be threatened by growing development 
pressure and related expansion activities around the 
communities where it occurs.  Additionally, 75% of the 
occupied habitat occurs on private lands.  In Colorado, 
endangered plant species are not afforded protection 
unless a Federal nexus exists, such as canal development 
projects.  Conservation efforts geared toward private 
lands would greatly benefit this species to prevent further 
isolation of the small existing populations most at risk 
from habitat fragmentation, thereby reducing the 
resiliency of these populations.   
 
According to the Colorado Natural Areas Program  life 
history study of clay-loving wild buckwheat, it appears 
that this species grows at highest densities away from 

 

 

 

 

other shrubs, such as black sagebrush (Artemisia nova).  
Other research in which individuals of clay-loving wild 
buckwheat were permanently tagged from 1990 to 2008 
supports the conclusion that this species is relatively long-
lived (20-30years minimum). 
 

Pests and Potential Problems 
Tent caterpillar impacts have been noted on clay-loving 
buckwheat.  
 

Environmental Concerns 
The effects of climate change could pose continued 
uncertainty to the long term survival of clay-loving wild 
buckwheat populations.  Due to the limited range of the 
Mancos shale formation and the long-lived nature of this 
species, its ability to migrate with changing climates is 
uncertain.  Decreased or lack of flowering has been noted 
in association with the 1998 drought in the region, thereby 
causing concern that a lack of precipitation, during the 
growing and flowering season, could significantly impact 
seedling recruitment.   
 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
N/A 
 
Prepared By:   
Christine Taliga; Plant Materials Specialist, USDA 
NRCS, Denver, Colorado. 
 
Citation 
Taliga, Christine E. Plant Fact Sheet for clay-loving wild 
buckwheat (Eriogonum pelinophilum). USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Colorado State Office.   
Denver, CO 80225-0426. 

Published September 2012 

Edited: 18Sep2012jab 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov>. 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

