RUBBER RABBITBRUSH 
 Ericameria nauseosa (Pallas ex 
Pursh) G.L. Nesom & Baird  

Plant Symbol = ERNA10 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Pullman Washington 

 

Sally and Andy Wasowski, Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center, 
www.wildflower.org  
 
Alternate Names 
Grey rabbitbrush, golden rabbitbrush, chamiso blanco, 
Chrysothamnus nauseosus (Pallas ex Pursh) Britton, 
Chrysocoma nauseosa Pallas ex Pursh, Bigelovia 
nauseosa Gray  
  
Uses  
Forage: Rubber rabbitbrush has marginal value for 
livestock but is an important browse species for wildlife 
during the winter months.  
  
Wildlife habitat: Small mammals and birds such as 
jackrabbits and sage grouse utilize rubber rabbitbrush for 
cover.  
  
Pollinator habitat: Rubber rabbitbrush attracts a wide 
array of native insects, including butterflies and small 
bees.  It is one the few native plant species in the 
Intermountain West that provides habitat for pollinators 
during the late summer and fall months.  
  
Range revegetation, erosion control and mine 
reclamation: Rubber rabbitbrush produces deep roots, 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

heavy litter and abundant seed. It grows rapidly and is 
able to establish on severe sites.  
  
Ethnobotanical: Native Americans used rubber 
rabbitbrush for baskets, yellow dye, chewing gum, tea, 
cough syrup, and to treat chest pains.  During World War 
II the plant was studied as a substitute for commercial 
rubber, and currently it is a small commercial rubber 
source.  
  
Ornamental: Rubber rabbitbrush is a desirable plant for 
low maintenance and sustainable landscaping.    
  
Status  
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State Department 
of Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).  
  
Description and Adaptation  
General: Composite family (Asteraceae).  Rubber 
rabbitbrush is a native, perennial, warm-season shrub that 
grows to 1 to 8 feet tall.  It has a rounded crown with 
stems originating from its base.  Stems and leaves are 
covered with dense white hairs.  Leaves are 0.75 to 2.75 
inches long, 0.02 to 0.12 inches wide, alternate, linear to 
spatula shaped with entire margins.  Flowers are yellow, 
tubular, 0.25 to 0.4 inch long, arranged in terminal, 
rounded clusters.  Flowers begin bloom late July – 
October.  Inflorescences and seed bracts often persist 
through winter.  Seeds are achenes with pappus and are 
wind disseminated.  Reproduction is primarily by seeds 
and epicormic buds.    
  
The species is taxonomically complex, and is divided into 
two subspecies and 22 varieties (ecotypes).  The 22 
ecotypes exhibit a great deal of variability in 
morphological characteristics and chemical composition.  
  
Distribution: Ericameria naseosa is present in New York 
and all Great Plains and western states in the United 
States, and in the Canadian provinces of Alberta, 
Saskatchewan, and British Columbia. For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 

 
 

 

 

Effects Information System. [Online] Available at 
http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/. (accessed 15 
Dec 2009). USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain 
Res. Sta., Fire Sci. Lab.   

nauseosus (Pallas ex Pursh) Britton, Asteraceae.  In 
J.K. Francis [ed.] Wildland shrubs of the United 
States and its territories: thamnic descriptions: vol 1. 
USDA Forest Service General Tech. Rep. IITF-
GTR-26. Fort Collins, CO.  

McArthur, E.D. and J.R. Taylor. 2004. Chrysothamnus 
 
 
 
 
 
Tirmenstein, D. 1999. Chrysothamnus nauseosus. In: Fire 
 
 
 
 
   
Prepared By  
Pamela L. Scheinost, USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Pullman, Washington  
   
Joe Scianna, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Bridger, Montana  
   
Daniel G. Ogle, USDA NRCS State Office, Boise, Idaho  
   
Citation  
Scheinost, P.L., J. Scianna, D.G. Ogle. 2010. Plant fact 
sheet for rubber rabbitbrush (Ericameria nauseosa). 
USDA-Natural Resources Conservation Service, Pullman 
Plant Materials Center, Pullman, WA.   
   

Published March, 2010 

Edited: 05Jan2010 dgo; 05Jan2010 js; 06Jan2010 pls; 
04Feb2010 jb  

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

 

Rubber rabbitbrush distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database.  
 
Habitat:  Rubber rabbitbrush inhabits dry, open areas on 
plains, valley bottoms, foothills and mountains.  It is 
associated with many habitat types (Tirmenstein 1999).    
  
Establishment  
Rubber rabbitbrush can be established by transplanting 
seedlings, or drilling or broadcasting seed.  Planting can 
be done in spring or fall, on prepared or unprepared 
seedbeds (Tirmenstein 1999).  Rubber rabbitbrush should 
be seeded in a mixture with forbs and grasses at a rate of 
0.025 lb Pure Live Seed (PLS) per acre.  This rate should 
be doubled if the seed is broadcast.  
  
Management  
To control invasive weeds while minimizing damage to 
rubber rabbitbrush, an application of chlosulfuron can be 
effective (Enloe et al. 2009).    
  
Environmental Concerns  
Although rubber rabbitbrush may appear to dominate a 
plant community soon after disturbance, it is not overly 
competitive (McArthur 1979) and is eventually replaced 
with other vegetation as the community matures.   
  
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
None  
  
References  
Enloe, S.F., A. Kniss, M. Ferrell, J. Lafantasie, and S.D. 
 
 
 
 
 

Aagard. 2009. Black greasewood (Sarcobatus 
vermiculatus), gray rabbitbrush (Ericameria 
nauseosa), and perennial grass response to 
chlorsulfuron and metsulfuron. Invasive Plant Sci. 
and Manage. 2:247-252.  

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

