BOTTLEBRUSH 
SQUIRRELTAIL 

Elymus elymoides (Raf.) Swezey 

ssp. brevifolius (J.G. Sm.) 

Barkworth 

Plant Symbol = ELELB2 

 
Contributed by: Upper Colorado Environmental Plant 
Center, Meeker, Colorado 

 

Bottlebrush squirreltail field at UCEPC Meeker, Colorado. 
 
Alternate Names  
Squirreltail, tall squirreltail, desert squirreltail 
 
Uses 
The  potential  uses  of  bottlebrush  squirreltail  include 
erosion control and domestic livestock and wildlife forage 
production. The plant establishes easily, remains green for 
a  long  period  and  is  palatable  throughout  the  winter. 
Squirreltail has become an important tool for oil shale and 
coal  mine  reclamation.  It  has  also  become  an  important 
source for reseeding after fire. It is quick to establish, has 
a proficient seed dispersal mechanism, and is resistant to 
fire damage. Bottlebrush squirreltail has also shown that it 
can  become  a  good  competitor  with  undesirable  annual 
weed  species.  Bottlebrush  squirreltail  is  recognized  as 
being  one  native  perennial  bunchgrass  that  has  potential 
for  broad-scale  application  in  range  seedings  where 
introduced  products  such  as  crested  and  Siberian 
wheatgrasses  and  Russian  wildryes  have  been  used 
traditionally.  Excellent  seed  dispersal,  ability  to  tolerate 
fire,  and  strong  seedling  vigor  make  bottlebrush 
squirreltail  an  attractive  species  for  use 
in  many 
conservation applications.  
 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

Status 
Please  consult  the  PLANTS  Web  site  and  your  State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status. 
 
Weediness 
This  plant  may  become  weedy  or  invasive  in  some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation 
if not properly managed.  Please consult with your local 
NRCS  Field  Office,  Cooperative  Extension  Service 
resource,  or  state  agriculture 
office,  state  natural 
department 
regarding 
its  status  and  use. 
  Weed 
information is also available from the PLANTS Web site 
at http://plants.usda.gov.  Please consult the Related Web 
Sites  on  the  Plant  Profile  for  this  species  for  further 
information. 
 
Description and Adaptation 

 

Bottlebrush squirreltail distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS 
Database. 
 
For updated distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Bottlebrush  squirreltail,  Elymus  elymoides,  is  a  cool-
season native perennial bunchgrass. The plant grows 8-25 
inches tall, and occurs primarily on dry, gravelly or saline 
soils  and  is  common  on  hillsides  and  alkaline  flats.  The 
stiff, involute leaf blades expand up to 3/16 of an inch in 
width and often become smooth or softly pubescent. The 
spikelets  are 
flowered  at  each  node  of  a 
disarticulating  rachis.  The  spikelets  drop  from  the  seed 
head and are disseminated by the  wind  into  surrounding 
areas.  
 
Bottlebrush  squirreltail  is  widely  distributed,  spanning 
from Mexico to British Columbia and from the west coast 
to the Dakotas and south to Oklahoma and Texas. It also 
occupies a wide range of elevations from 4,000 to 10,500 
feet.  As  a  species,  Elymus  elymoides  has  good  drought 

two 

 
 

 

tolerance 

to  saline-alkali  soils. 

resistance  and 
It 
establishes  easily  and  creates  a  good  environment  for 
succession. Bottlebrush  squirreltail is also quite resistant 
to  fire.  The  seedheads  of  squirreltail  have  low  densities 
and  burn  quickly  at  relatively  low  temperatures  when 
compared  to  other  perennial  bunchgrasses.  Bottlebrush 
squirreltail  is  valuable  winter  forage  for  many  domestic 
and wildlife species because of its long green period. 
 
Establishment 
For  best  results,  bottlebrush  squirreltail  seed  should  be 
planted to a depth of ¼ to ½ inch  into a  firm  weed-free 
seedbed.  For  pure  stands  the  recommended  drill  seeding 
rate  is  7  lb  PLS  per  acre.  Seed  can  be  planted  in  early 
spring, but late dormant fall seeding is recommended for 
best  annual  weed  suppression.    Squirreltail  does  not 
establish  well  into  existing  perennial  shrub  communities 
without pre-mechanical treatment to reduce shrub density. 
 
Management 
Plants that green  up early  will remain green through the 
fall  and  into  winter.  Stands  should  be  protected  from 
heavy grazing by livestock and wildlife, especially during 
flowering.  Protection  ensures  sufficient  seed  production 
to  maintain  the  stand.  Wildland  seed  collection  occurs 
from  early  July  to  mid  September.  Seed  yields  can  vary 
widely  depending  on  stand  age  and  density.  Because 
bottlebrush  squirreltail  seed  is  dispersed  quite  easily  by 
wind,  open  fallow  fields  may  be  subject  to  bottlebrush 
squirreltail invasion. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Plants are known to be susceptible to rust disease. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
Bottlebrush  squirreltail  can  pose  aggressive  behavior 
because of easy seed dispersal. Some routine management 
may be required to control and maintain this plant species 
in  an  agronomic,  horticultural  or  home  landscaping 
application,  but  control  practices  are  financially  feasible 
and practical.  No specific  management is anticipated in 
range  or  large  landscape  plantings  where  the  species 
naturally occurs. 
 
Control 
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use it safely.  Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method.   
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
Fish Creek Germplasm E. elymoides ssp. elymoides, Toe 
Jam Creek Germplasm E. elymoides ssp. californicus and 
Sand Hollow Germplasm E. multisetus were released and 
are  maintained  by  the  USDA-ARS  Forage  and  Range 
Research Laboratory, Logan, Utah.  
 

 

are 

available 

Tusas  Germplasm  E.  elymoides  ssp.  brevifolius 
is 
available  from  Los  Lunas  Plant  Materials  Center,  Los 
Lunas, New Mexico.  
 
Pueblo  and  Wapiti  Germplasm  Elymus  elymoides  ssp. 
brevifolius 
from  Upper  Colorado 
Environmental Plant Center, Meeker, Colorado.  
 
Prepared By  
Heather R Plumb, Plant Scientist-Range Plants (UCEPC) 
Meeker, Colorado. 
 
Citation 
Ogle, Dan.2006. Plant Guide Elymus elymoides.  USDA 
NRCS Idaho State Office. Boise, Idaho. 
 
Parr, S. 2005. Release Document for Wapiti Germplasm. 
Upper Colorado Environmental Plant Center. Meeker, 
Colorado 81641. 
 
Plumb, H. 2010. Brochure for bottlebrush squirreltail 
Elymus elymoides ssp. brevifolius. Upper Colorado 
Environmental Plant Center. Meeker, Colorado 81641. 

Published:  May 2010 

Edited: April 2010 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

