ENGELMANN’S DAISY 
Engelmannia peristenia (Raf.) 
Goodman & C.A. Lawson  

Plant Symbol = ENPE4 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS James E. “Bud” Smith 
Plant Materials Center, Knox City, Texas 

Texas AgriLife Research and Extension at Uvalde  2000 Copyright 
Texas A&M University System  

Alternate Names 
Cutleaf daisy 
Uses  
Livestock:  Engelmann’s daisy is rarely found on 
overgrazed pastures due to its palatability by livestock.  
Cattle, sheep, and goats can all benefit from the high 
protein and digestibility obtained from this species.  
Crude protein can reach as high as twenty-five percent in 
early spring.  Livestock, like wildlife, can benefit from 
grazing on Engelmann’s daisy before warm-season 
varieties become available.  
  
Wildlife:  This species benefits wildlife in several ways.  
Deer and rabbits enjoy feeding on Engelmann’s daisy.  It 
has high protein content and is available earlier in the year 
than warm season vegetation.  Engelmann’s daisy also 
provides cover for small mammals and many species of 
birds.    
  
Erosion Control:  Engelmann’s daisy is commonly 
planted on slopes like roadsides and embankments to help 
reduce the potential of soil erosion.   

 

Plant Fact Sheet

Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site 
(http://plants.usda.gov) and your State Department of 
Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g. 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).  
  
Weediness   
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation 
if not properly managed.  Please consult with your local 
NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service 
office, state natural resource, or state agriculture 
department regarding its status and use.  Weed 
information is also available from the PLANTS Web site; 
please consult the related web sites on the Plant Profile 
for this species for further information.  
  
Description   
Engelmann’s daisy is a native, cool-season perennial 
which can grow up to three feet tall.  The plant produces a 
basal rosette of leaves that can grow eight inches long.  
Leaves are very deeply cleft or almost divided.  Coarse 
hair can been found on both the leaves and stems of the 
plant.  The vegetation remains green throughout the 
winter, and begins to flower in May.  The flower head 
elongates during the spring months.  Engelmann’s daisy 
flower heads are made up of yellow ray and disk flowers.  
They measure about one to two inches in diameter.  
During extreme heat, the petals of the plant fold 
downward.  
  
Adaptation  
Engelmann’s daisy is adapted to a wide range of soil 
types and climate conditions, but is found most frequently 
throughout central Texas.  Ideal soil types range from 
sandy loams to clay loams.  Engelmann’s daisy does not 
seem to tolerate heavy clay soils, salinity, or deep sands.  
The plant has a deep tap root which makes it a hardy, 
drought tolerate species.  
  
Distribution  
Engelmann’s daisy is most commonly found throughout 
north central Texas and the Edward’s Plateau.  It is also 
found as far north as South Dakota, as far west as 
Arizona, and as far east as Louisiana.  For a current 
distribution map, please consult the Plant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Website. 
 
Establishment  
Planting should be done in late summer or in the fall.   
Sow seed ¼ to ¾ inch deep in a well prepared, firm 
seedbed.  The full seeding rate for Engelmann’s daisy is 

 
 

 

fifteen pounds of pure live seed (pls) per acre.  When 
planting this as a component of a seed mixture, the 
seeding rate should be adjusted to the desired percent of 
the mix.  Ideal plant spacing would be two to three plants 
per square yard.  Fertilizer applications will vary 
depending on individual soil samples.  Nitrogen, 
potassium, and phosphorus should be considered to bring 
the fertility up to a medium level.  Twenty pounds of a 
mixture of these three fertilizers will normally provide 
this level of fertility; however, a soil sample should 
always be taken before applying fertilizer.    
  
Management  
Engelmann’s  daisy  is  rarely  planted  as  a  monoculture 
planting but as a component of a range seeding mixture.  
Twelve  months  of  grazing  deferment  should  be  planned 
and  applied  to  allow  plant  establishment.    Areas  with 
heavy  deer  populations  should  consider  the  impact  and 
added maintenance associated with attempting to establish 
this species.    
  
Proper management of Engelmann’s daisy is required to 
ensure  the  plant  is  not  overgrazed  or  over  utilized  by 
livestock  or  wildlife.    Consult  your  local  NRCS  Field 
Office 
for  assistance  with  planning  and  applying 
prescribed grazing.  
  
Control   
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use it safely.  Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method.  Trade names 
and control measures appear in this document only to 
provide specific information.  USDA NRCS does not 
guarantee or warranty the products and control methods 
named, and other products may be equally effective.  
  
Pests and Potential Problems  
None known  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
‘Eldorado’ Engelmann’s daisy was released from the 
James E. “Bud” Smith Plant Materials Center, Knox City, 
TX in 1985. It originated from a native collection in 
Schleicher County, TX, and released to provide an 
adapted forb for inclusion in range mixes for wildlife and 
livestock browse.  
  

 

Prepared By & Species Coordinator:   
Brandon Carr, USDA NRCS James E. “Bud” Smith Plant 
Materials Center, Knox City, Texas  
  
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program  

 USDA NRCS 2009  

Published:  November, 2009 

Edited:  

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

