 

 

 

 

  Plant Fact Sheet

COMMON WOOLLY 

SUNFLOWER 

Eriophyllum lanatum Forbes 

Plant Symbol = ERLA6 

Contributed by: NRCS Plant Materials Center, Pullman, 
WA 

Eriophyllum lanatum.  Ben Legler, University of 
Washington Burke Herbarium 

 

Alternative Names 
Common Alternate Names: Oregon sunshine, golden 
yarrow, yarrow leaved eriophyllum, dwarf woolly 
sunflower, Pursh’s woolyleaf 
 
Scientific Alternate Names: None 

Uses 
Pollinator habitat: Eriophyllum lanatam attracts beetles, 
syrphid flies, bees, moths and butterflies.  Butterflies that 
are known to visit this plant include:  orange sulfur, red 
admiral, comma, and skipper.  It also serves as a host 
plant for the painted lady butterfly.  An endangered 

 

butterfly in Oregon, Fender’s Blue (Icaricia icarioides 
fenderi) relies on E. lanatum for a source of nectar. 
 
Ornamental: This plant is hardy to Zone 3 and can be 
used in perennial borders, along pathways, and in rock 
gardens and embankments. The Lady Bird Wildflower 
Center recommends selecting a local ecotype, planting 
several plants in a group, and pruning the dead branches. 
 
Rangeland vegetation: This plant is quick to establish and 
can be used for revegetation and diversification of 
rangeland in a variety of habitats.    
 
Ethnobotanical: People of the Miwok tribe made a 
poultice of the leaves of this plant and bound them to 
aching parts of the body; the Skagit rubbed the leaves on 
skin to prevent chapping; and the Chehalis used the dried 
flowers as a love charm. 

Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Description and Adaptation 
Sunflower family (Asteraceae).  Eriophyllum lanatum is a 
native forb or subshrub, and may be an annual, biennial, 
or short- or long-lived perennial depending on site 
conditions.  It has a multi-branched, erect to spreading 
form and grows to 10 to 60 cm (4 to 24 in) tall.  Stems 
and leaves are covered with white hairs.  Leaves are 2.5 to 
7.5 cm (1 to 3 in) long and irregularly divided into narrow 
lobes.  Flowers are solitary, on long stems and bloom 
May through July.  The flower head is 4 to 6.5 cm (1.5 to 
2.5 in) wide with golden yellow disk flowers and 8 to 12 
yellow ray flowers, each 1.5 to 2 cm (0.6 to 0.8 in) long.  
Flower bracts are broad and erect.  Seed is narrow, 
smooth, has four angles and a crown of scales or short 
pappus.   
 
Common woolly sunflower is adapted to areas with dry, 
rocky or sandy soil which receive a minimum of 25 cm 
(10 in) annual precipitation at elevations from sea level to 
3,050 m (10,000ft).  The plant has a high drought 
tolerance due to its white hairs that conserve water by 
reflecting heat and reducing air movement across the leaf 
surfaces.  It often grows in rocky areas along roadsides, 
on coulees, bluffs, and canyons, and in dry grassland, 
thickets and forests. 
 
This plant is common on both sides of the Cascade 
Mountains from British Columbia south to Washington, 

Oregon and California.  Its range extends east to Nevada, 
Idaho, northwestern Utah, western Wyoming, and western 
Montana.   
 

 

Common woolly sunflower distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS 
Database. 

For updated distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 

Establishment 
Plants can be established by seed or seedlings.  Seeds 
should be drilled into a weed-free seed bed in the fall at a 
rate of 3.4 kg PLS per ha (3 lbs PLS per acre) and at a 
depth of 0.6 cm (0.25 in).  When planted in a mix, the 
seeding rate should be adjusted according to the 
proportion of the mix.  The seed requires a cold and moist 
period of about 90 days for optimal germination. 
 
To transplant seedlings, the seed should be planted in 
containers in October or November, stratified in cold and 
moist conditions for a period of 90 days, and moved 
inside to a greenhouse.  The plants should be hardened off 
in a cold frame for 2 to 4 weeks prior to transplanting to a 
prepared field site.  Plants should be spaced 15 to 45 cm 
(6 to 18 in) apart.   

Management 
Eriophyllum lanatum is a prolific seed producer and will 
rapidly spread to any surrounding open ground.  If plant 
spread is not desired, flower heads should be removed 
prior to seed ripening.   
 
 

 
Eriophyllum lanatum seeds.  Bend Seed Extractory, 
Seeds of Success 

Pests and Potential Problems 
Insects may significantly damage the foliage and seed. 

 

Environmental Concerns 
None. 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
None, although seed and seedlings are available from 
several vendors. 

Prepared By  
Pamela L.S. Pavek, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Pullman, Washington 

Citation 
Pavek, P.L.S. 2012. Plant fact sheet for common woolly 
sunflower (Eriophyllum lanatum). USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Pullman Plant Materials 
Center. Pullman, WA. 

Published January 2012 

Edited: 04Jan2012 plsp; 09Jan2012 aym; 13Jan2012 jab 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

