 

 
FLAT-TOP GOLDENTOP 
Euthamia graminifolia (L.) Nutt. 

Plant Symbol = EUGR5 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS Cape May Plant Materials 
Center 

 

Thomas G. Barnes @ USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database / Barnes, T.G., 
and S.W. Francis. 2004. Wildflowers and ferns of Kentucky. University 
Press of Kentucky. 
 
Alternative Names 
Common Alternate Names: bushy, common, fragrant, 
grass-leaved, or flat-topped goldenrod 
 
Scientific Alternate Names: 
Solidago graminifolia (L.) Salisb. 
Solidago lanceolata L.  
Chrysocoma graminifolia L. 
 
Uses 
Wildlife Use:Flat-top goldentop provides a nectar source 
for pollinators and is well-suited for use in pollinator 
restoration. Preliminary observation found that flat-top 
goldentop attracted 13 different species of Hymenoptera 
and Lepidoptera in Cape May, New Jersey. The European 
honey bee (Apis mellifera),common buckeye (Junonia 
coenia), and eastern carpenter bee (Xylocopa virginica) 
were most frequently observed visiting the flower. 
 
The wildlife value of this species is considered low; 
nevertheless, songbirds such as the American goldfinch 
(Carduelis tristis) and the swamp sparrow (Melospiza 
georgiana) feed on the seeds (Hilty, 2002). Deer and 
rabbit enjoy browsing the plant. 
 
The flower attracts the goldenrod soldier beetle 
(Chauliognathus pensylvanicus) and black blister beetle 
(Epicauta pensylvanica). The goldenrod soldier beetle 
larvae are beneficial insects known to feed on aphids, 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

maggots, caterpillars, and grasshopper eggs; while the 
adults help to pollinate plants (Trigg, 2005). Black blister 
beetles produce cantharidin, a poisonous substance that 
may poison animals that graze the plant (Marlin, n.d.). 
Please refer to Hilty (2002b) for a complete list of  insects 
that visit this plant. 
 
Status  
E. graminifolia is a native, facultative wetland plant that 
usually occurs in wetlands (67–99%) but is occasionally 
found in non-wetlands. Please consult the PLANTS Web 
site and your State Department of Natural Resources for 
this plant’s current status (e.g., threatened or endangered 
species, state noxious status, and wetland indicator 
values) 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation 
if not properly managed. Please consult with your local 
NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service 
office, state natural resource, or state agriculture 
department regarding its status and use. Weed information 
is also available from the PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov. Please consult the Related Web 
Sites on the Plant Profile for this species for further 
information. 

Description and Adaptation 
Description: Flat-top goldentop is an upright, erect, native 
perennial with a many-branched inflorescence. It is an 
herb of the Asteraceae family whose species name means 
“grass-leaf”. It grows to 3–6 ft in height with a 1–2 ft 
spread. The upper ½ of the plant appears bushy due to its 
branched stems and grass-like, narrow to linear, alternate 
leaves. It grows from a long-slender rhizome. 
The stalk-less 2–4 in long leaves taper to a long point, and 
narrow towards the stem. The leaf has 3–5 nerves 
underneath and is minutely rough-pubescent along nerves 
and margins. There are a few resinous dots on the 
underside of the leaf. The lower leaves are deciduous 
early in plant’s life cycle and the upper leaves are reduced 
towards the inflorescence. The leaves omit a scent when 
crushed.  
The primary stalk supporting the flower cluster is winged 
and pubescent with hairs lying flat on the wing margins. 
The flower heads are 2–2.5 in high, are arranged in dense, 
stalk-less, small flat-topped clusters of 20–35 flowers 
with s mall rays. It has pale to bright yellow flowers that 
bloom in the late summer or early fall. The outer flowers 
of the cluster open first. The flower heads are cone-
shaped and attached at the pointed end. The whorl of 

 

 

 

 

small leaves beneath the flower is ovoid to bell-shaped. 
The obtuse or rounded, yellow bracts around the flower 
are somewhat sticky. These overlapping bracts are 3.1 
mm long and occasionally have green tips. The .02 in (.5 
mm) long seed is a hard, pubescent, one-seeded, 
indehiscent white nutlet. The seed is attached to hair-like 
bristles (pappus). The receptacle is finely fringed. 
 
E. graminifolia var. graminifolia is distinguished by its 
relatively narrow leaves that are 11–20 times as long as 
wide (Gleason and Cronquist, 1963). E. graminifolia var. 
hirtipes is the hybrid of E. graminifolia and E. 
caroliniana (Fernald, 1950), and is distinguished by its 
relatively broad, hairy leaf blades and few-flowered head. 
 

 

Flat-top goldentop distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database. 
 
Adaptation: Flat-top goldentop can be found in moist, 
open ground; meadows; prairies; roadsides; ditches; inter-
dunal flats; exposed lakes; conifer swamps; lowland 
forests; calcareous seeps; and sandy moist shorelines. It is 
tolerant of poor, gravelly, sandy, or dry soils and once 
established, can tolerate droughty conditions. It is also 
found in shaded wood edges or sunny fields and clearings. 
For updated distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Es tablishment 
Seed can be sown year-round in a greenhouse that is at 
least 65°F. The recommended planting is three seeds per 2 
in plug, watered regularly. It can also be sown outdoors 
from seed in the fall or sow the seed in a coldframe. E. 
graminifolia is a prolific rhizomatous perennial that 
spreads aggressively through vegetative reproduction. 
When growing from vegetative material divide rootball 
(rhizomatous clumps) while plant is dormant. Cuttings 
should be kept in the greenhouse at least 3 months to 
allow for ample root and shoot development. When 
transplanted into field, plant on 1.5–2 ft centers.  

Unwanted seed dispersal from wind can be prevented by 
the development of a vegetative curtain or buffer with 
native shrubs, vines, or understory trees.  
Management 
Adding nitrogen will increase plant size, including an 
increase of stem height, number of leaves, and stem 
diameter. E. graminifolia seems to have a delayed 
response to nitrogen, and may store access N over winter 
in its rhizomes. Adding N has been shown to increase the 
density of stems in the second year after fertilization, 
thereby eliminating other plant species and reducing 
community diversity. 

Pests and Potential Problems  
Allelopathic chemical properties have been found in root 
and leaf extracts of flat-top goldentop and may interfere 
with the growth of other species. Leaf leachates tend to 
interfere with seed germination while root leachates 
negatively affect the root growth of competing plants. 
Crops such as radish and lettuce are susceptible to 
allelopathic competition and should not be grown in the 
same area. Maples have also been negatively affected by 
similar Solidago species. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
Due to rhizomatous growth, E. graminifolia is somewhat 
aggressive. This plant may become a noxious weed so is 
perhaps not a good choice for more formal gardens unless 
controlled with a complimentary buffer planting. It is not 
as aggressive as S. Canadensis or S. rugosa. E. 
graminifolia is considered invasive in Europe. 

Control 
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use it safely. Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method. 
 
Prepared By: Christopher M. Sheahan. USDA-NRCS, 
Cape May Plant Materials Center, Cape May, NJ. 
 
Citation: Sheahan, C.M. 2012. Fact sheet for flat-top 
goldentop (Euthamia graminifolia). USDA-NRCS, Cape 
May Plant Materials Center. Cape May, NJ. 08210. 
 
Published July 2012 
 
Edited: 
 
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

US DA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

