CREEPING BURHEAD 

Echinodorus cordifolius 

(L.) Griseb. 

Plant Symbol = ECCO3 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS Jamie L. Whitten Plant 
Materials Center, Coffeeville, MS 

 

Figure 1 Creeping burhead 

Alternate Names 
None listed. 

Uses 
Creeping burhead is an attractive aquatic plant that is 
recommended for use in shallow ponds and pools.  It may 
also be suitable for use in constructed wetlands.  Wildlife 
benefits have not been documented but it can provide 
some cover for smaller species. 

Status 
Creeping burhead is listed as extirpated in Indiana and 
endangered in Maryland.  This plant is considered an 
obligate wetland indicator species.  Please consult the 
PLANTS Web site and your State Department of Natural 
Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., threatened 
or endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland 
indicator values). 

Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation 
if not properly managed.  Please consult with your local 
NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service 
office, state natural resource, or state agriculture 
department regarding its status and use. 

 
 

 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

Weed information is also available from the PLANTS 
Web site at http://plants.usda.gov.  Please consult the 
Related Web Sites on the Plant Profile for this species for 
further information. 

Description and Adaptation 
Creeping burhead is a creeping annual or short-lived 
perennial.  The leaves are broadly heart shaped, 2-7 
inches long and almost as wide.  The principal veins are 
conspicuous and impressed on the upper surface of the 
leaf blade.  The petioles are 4-20 inches long, enlarged 
and spongy towards the base.  The flowering shoot 
(scape) can reach 3 feet or more in length; scapes are 
upright when young, often drooping and rooting at the 
tips to produce new plantlets.  Numerous whorls of 
flowers with white petals and greenish centers are located 
along the scape. Flowering begins in June and continues 
until frost. The fruiting heads are round, bur like clusters 
of small brown seeds.  The native range of the species is 
from Maryland south to Florida, west to Missouri and the 
panhandle of Texas.  It is usually found growing in 
swamps, wet woodlands, marshes, and ditches. There are 
some indications that it prefers a slightly shaded location.  
Best growth is generally on wetland soils with fairly high 
organic matter.   
  

 

Creeping burhead distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database. 

For updated distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 

Establishment 
Leflore Source creeping burhead, a selection of this 
species, is established using transplants. The creeping 
nature of this plant produces numerous small plantlets that 
can be dug and divided from the parent plant.

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
Leflore Source creeping burhead was originally collected 
in the Mississippi Delta and was released as source 
identified material in 1996 by the Natural Resources 
Conservation Service (NRCS), the Mississippi 
Agricultural and Forestry Experiment Station (MAFES), 
and the Department of Wildlife and Fisheries at 
Mississippi State University. 
 
Prepared By 
Thomas C. Moss, USDA NRCS Jamie L. Whitten Plant 
Materials Center, Coffeeville, MS  
 
Citation 
Moss, T. C. 2011.  Plant fact sheet for powdery creeping 
burhead (Echinodorus cordifolius).  USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Jamie L. Whitten Plant 
Materials Center, Coffeeville, MS 38922. 
 
Published: September 2011 
 
Edited: 09Sep2011tm 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

 

Larger plants can also be dug and should be planted 
without further division. Cutting the leaves before 
planting is usually not necessary unless they are unusually 
tall, however, cutting any attached flower scapes is 
recommended.  The plants can be planted year round, but 
spring and fall planting will be less stressful.    
Recommended plant spacing is 2-3 feet.  After planting, 
water levels should be kept at about 1-2 inches until the 
plants become established.  A light application of 
complete fertilizer may be applied to aid establishment.  

Management 
Established plants will tolerate water depths up to one 
foot during the growing season, with greater depths 
acceptable when the plants are dormant. If the growing 
site is infertile, the plants will respond to two or three 
light applications of complete fertilizer during the 
growing season.  Burning or mowing is not 
recommended.   

Pests and Potential Problems 
Occasional late-summer leaf dieback has been observed.  

Environmental Concerns 
Further work is needed to determine creeping burhead’s 
adaptation in wetlands subject to sewage effluent. 

Control 
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use it safely.  Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method.  Trade names 
and control measures appear in this document only to 
provide specific information.  USDA NRCS does not 
guarantee or warranty the products and control methods 
named, and other products may be equally effective. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

