SAND FESCUE 

Festuca ammobia Pavlick 

Plant Symbol = FEAM5 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, Oregon 

 

Figure 1.  Sand fescue in flower. Photo by Dale Darris. 

Alternate Names 
Depending on the taxonomic authority, other names 
include Festuca rubra ssp. arenicola, Festuca rubra ssp. 
densiuscula, and Festuca rubra ssp. pruinosa or rock 
fescue. Classification remains under review.  

Uses 
Sand fescue spreads by short rhizomes (underground 
stems) and develops extensive roots giving it excellent 
soil and sand binding capability for erosion control along 
beaches and streambanks, and on other disturbed slopes.  
Additional uses include forage for cattle and horses, 
endemic wildlife food and cover, and restoration of 
coastal meadows and other native plant communities.  
The species is also planted for low maintenance turf and 
ornamental landscaping.  It has potential as perennial 
cover in vineyards, young orchards, and no-mow lawns.  
 
   

 
 

 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

Status 
Sand fescue occurs equally in wetlands and drier uplands. 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Description and Adaptation 
Sand fescue is a dense, fine textured, medium to long 
lived, perennial cool season grass. It spreads slowly from 
rhizomes and seed.  Foliage is primarily basal and 
typically green, with some individuals or populations 
turning blue-grey in summer.  Stems (culms) grow to a 
height of 8-24 inches (20-60 cm) and the flower head 
(panicle or inflorescence) is branched but often 
compressed rather than open.  Most populations flower in 
May or June, maturing seed a month later.  Sand fescue is 
part of a diverse complex of red fescue species that have 
transitional forms and introduced germplasm.  They 
intergrade from one to another making separation and 
identification difficult and somewhat disputed. 
 
The prototypical native sand fescue is found on beaches, 
rock crevices, meadows, gravelly sites, and streambanks 
in full sun to partial shade primarily along the Pacific 
Coast.  It occurs only at lower elevations on moist to 
moderately dry soils from California to Washington. The 
natural range may extend further north into coastal British 
Columbia but not inland.  The species tolerates many soil 
types besides sands, including silty clay loams with low 
fertility.  Coastal types have presumed tolerance to salt 
spray and preference for moderately acidic to neutral, 
well- to moderately well-drained soils. Drought tolerance 
may exceed that of other closely related red fescues. 
 

 
Figure 2.Sand fescue distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database. 

For updated distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 

Establishment 
Sand fescue seed germinates readily, indicating dormancy 
is low or nonexistent in most populations.  Fall sowing is 
preferred to reduce the need for irrigation the following 
spring and summer.  Establishment is slow and plants 
seldom flower the first full growing season.  Where weed 
competition is expected to be high, fertilization should be 
postponed for the first six months or more. There are 
365,000 to 500,000 seeds/lb.  A 1 lb/ac pure live seed 
(PLS) rate results in 8-12 live seeds/sq. ft.  Suggested 
seeding rates for general revegetation are 4-10 lbs/ac 
when drilled alone at a depth of ¼ to ½ in.  If broadcast 
sown, rates are often increased 1.5 to 2 times this amount.  
For turf, a rate of 1 lb/1000 sq. ft. has been recommended.  
As with many grasses to be planted on initially poor 
quality soils, an organic mulch or compost amendment 
can benefit establishment and growth.  

Management 
In western Oregon, fall sown plants readily survive the 
wet winters and warm, dry summers and often remain 
actively growing throughout the dry season without 
supplemental water.  Under hot, dry conditions of 
California’s Central Valley, regular, deep spring and 
summer irrigation is beneficial to keep plants green, and 
may be required for survival on very droughty soils.  
Long term tolerance to high heat is yet to be determined. 
 
Until more is known, grazing management practices 
similar to those suggested for introduced creeping red 
fescue and related pasture mixtures should be used.  In a 
mowing study at Corvallis, Oregon, plants were injured 
(partial die off at the base) and the number of seed heads 
reduced in the spring following a single fall mowing at a 
height of 1 to 1 ½ in.  For turf or ground cover 
management, plants should not be mowed below a 2 ½ in. 
height. Fertilization is optional depending on goals and 
site conditions.  Sand fescue appears to perform well 
under low fertility.  Foliage can become grey-blue in 
summer. 

Pests and Potential Problems 
Sand fescue has few apparent insect problems.  
Among the most frequently observed foliar diseases 
are fungal leaf and stem rusts in the genus Puccinia.  
Occurrence of other turf and pasture diseases typical 
of red fescues is not well documented. Rodents such as 
voles, field mice, and pocket gophers can damage 
plants and stands in some years.  The species is slow to 
establish and plants may suffer early on from weed 
competition.

 

Environmental Concerns 
Sand fescue is not considered weedy within its natural 
range.  The potential exists for populations to cross with 
other native and introduced forms or species of red fescue 
creating intermediate types or hybrids.   

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
Molate red fescue, Point Molate fescue, and Molate 
fescue are unofficial names that appear in the seed trade 
and may be derived from native sand fescue growing 
along the Pacific Coast.  A natural blue form of the 
species is the cultivar ‘Molate Blue’.  It was first collected 
and developed by David Amme from a remnant coastal 
prairie population at Point Molate near San Francisco, 
California.   ‘Molate Blue’ is under Plant Variety 
Protection (PVP) and produced commercially in 
California.  The Corvallis Plant Materials Center is 
increasing seed of material derived from Coastal Oregon 
and selected for its blue color, shorter seed heads, and 
fewer visual signs of leaf and stem rusts. 

Prepared By  
Dale Darris, USDA NRCS, Corvallis Plant Materials 
Center 

Citation 
Darris, D. 2011. Plant fact sheet for sand fescue (Festuca 
ammobia). USDA Natural Resources Conservation 
Service, Corvallis, Oregon. 97330. 

Published September 2011 

Edited: 02nov2011dcd  

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

