STRETCHBERRY 
Forestiera pubescens Nutt.  

Plant Symbol = FOPU2 

 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Montana Plant Materials 
Center  

Stretchberry 

 

 
Alternate Names    
Forestiera neomexicana, New Mexico forestiera, New 
Mexico olive, New Mexico privet.  
  
Uses  
Stretchberry has several conservation applications 
including windbreaks, shelterbelts, and living snowfences.  
It can be used in wildlife plantings for nesting, cover, and 
food.  Although the species performs best when provided 
with adequate soil moisture, it is considered fairly drought 
tolerant and can be used in Xeriscapes® and for mine land 
reclamation.  
  
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
  
Description and Adaptation  
Stretchberry is a multi-stemmed, perennial shrub reaching 
a mature height of 12 to 15 feet under ideal conditions 
(high soil moisture, good nutrition).  It has numerous, 
sometimes interlocking branches, and is capable of 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

sprouting from the base.  The light-green to grayish-green 
oblong simple leaves have an opposite arrangement on the 
stem.  New bark is smooth and light gray to brown; old 
bark tends to be smooth and light gray.  The yellow 
flowers are inconspicuous and borne in dense clusters in 
the axils of the previous year’s leaves.  Stretchberry 
blooms in late March or early to mid-April before new 
leaves appear.    
  
Stretchberry fruit is a round to oblong drupe (berry) that 
matures to a dark bluish-black to black color from June to 
September.  Fruit retention tends to be moderate, the fruit 
often lost to birds before falling to the ground.  
Stretchberry is comparable to skunkbush sumac Rhus 
trilobata in function and use.  It tends to form dense, 
almost impenetrable hedges, although the branches of 
stretchberry are more linear, erect, and supple than 
skunkbush sumac.  
  
Stretchberry is native to southwestern United States.  It 
grows along stream courses, moist valleys, hillsides, and 
mesas at elevations of 3,000 to 7,000 feet.  It is well 
adapted to annual precipitation zones ranging from 
approximately 9 to 24 inches.  It grows best in soils with a 
pH range of 7.0 to 8.5.  It is described as needing a 
minimum of 160 frost-free days, although it grows well in 
Montana in areas characterized by a 135-day growing 
season.  
  
Distribution:  Stretchberry is found in Arizona, 
California, Colorado, Nevada, New Mexico, Oklahoma, 
Texas and Utah.  Please consult the Plant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
  
Establishment  
Stretchberry establishes from seed, containerized, or 
bareroot stock.  Plant seeds in moist soil in the fall or 
prior to February for natural stratification.  Seedlings 
emerge by May.  For spring planting in May, seeds must 
be stratified for 30 days in moist sand at 38 degrees 
Fahrenheit.  Thin seedling to two-foot spacing within 
rows.    
  
Management  
Although stretchberry is considered drought tolerant, its 
performance is improved with supplemental watering and 
fertility.  As with other woody plants, it is important to 
control weeds during establishment with tillage, weed 
cloth, or careful application of herbicides.  
   
Pests and Potential Problems  
No serious insect or disease problems have been 
observed.  

 
 

 

Environmental Concerns  
None  
  
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
“Jemez” stretchberry was released in 1978 by the 
Agricultural Experiment Stations at New Mexico State 
and Colorado State Universities, the New Mexico 
Highway Department and Los Lunas New Mexico Plant 
Materials Center.  The original seed was collected from a 
population at Jemez Springs, New Mexico in 1939.  
  
Prepared By:  
James S. Jacobs, Plant Materials Specialist, USDA-
NRCS, Bozeman, Montana.  
 
Citation 
Jacobs, J.  2009. Plant fact sheet for stretchberry 
(Forestiera pubescens Nutt.). USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Federal Building, Bozeman, MT  
59715. 

Published  September, 2009 

Edited: 17Aug09JSJ  

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

