DOWNY 

RATTLESNAKE 

PLANTAIN 

Goodyera pubescens (Willd.) R. Br 

Plant Symbol = GOPU 

 

Contributed by:  USDS NRCS Norman A. Berg National 

Plant Materials Center 

 

© Randy Pheobus 

 
USDA-NRCS National Plant Materials Center 

Alternate Names 
Peramium pubescens (Willd.) 

Uses 
Downy rattlesnake plantain is useful for woodland 
wildflower plantings and as an indoor terrarium plant.  
Medicinal Use: Native Americans used it to treat 
snakebites, burns and many other ailments. 

Status 
Downy rattlesnake plantain is listed as endangered in 
Florida and exploitably vulnerable in New York. 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

 
Description and Adaptation 
Downy rattlesnake plantains are one of the many species 
of orchids native to eastern North America. They can be 
found growing in dry to moist upland woods with acidic 
soils.  The plants are low growing with stems that creep 
along the soil surface, often dividing and forming small 
colonies.  Leaves lay close to the soil in circular 
arrangement (basal rosette) around a central growing 
point.  Leaves are oval and about 1.5 to 2.5 inches long. 
Downy rattlesnake plantain has striking leaves marked 
with a network of silvery veins and a broad stripe down 
the center, resembling the skin of a snake.  All parts of the 
plant are covered with a very fine downy hair especially 
noticeable on the bloom spike.  Despite the name, downy 
rattlesnake plantain is not related to the common lawn 
weed plantains, but has similar appearing rosettes of 
leaves.  The evergreen foliage is attractive year round, 
with individual leaves lasting 3 to 4 years.  It flowers in 
late summer with small white flowers densely packed on 
a slender cylindrical spike, 6 to 18 inches tall.  Downy 
rattlesnake plantain occurs in the entire eastern half of the 
U.S. and Canada from Ontario and Quebec south to 
Oklahoma, Arkansas, Mississippi and Florida.  
  

 
Downy rattlesnake plantain distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS 
Database. 

For updated distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 

Establishment 
Obtain only nursery/greenhouse propagated plants from 
reputable growers, and not wild collected plants.  Orchids 
are slow to regenerate in the wild and may be easily 
eliminated through irresponsible wild collection, and may 

be protected by law.  Downy rattlesnake plantain requires 
a site with some shade and well-drained slightly acidic 
soil with sand and organic matter such as peat or leaf 
mold.  The right soil conditions are important for survival. 
Acid soil and good drainage, especially in winter, are 
essential.  Downy rattlesnake plantain is also one of the 
few native plants that can be easily grown indoors and it 
makes an excellent terrarium plant with its attractive 
leaves.  Purchase only nursery grown plants from 
reputable nurseries.   

Management 
Downy rattlesnake plantain does well under the open 
shaded canopy of trees and taller shrubs.  Smaller shrubs 
and low growing plants should not be allowed to grow 
very close or overtop of downy rattlesnake plantain.     

Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no known problems associated with downy 
rattlesnake plantain. 

Environmental Concerns 
There are no known environmental concerns associated 
with downy rattlesnake plantain. 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
Downy rattlesnake plantain is available from commercial 
sources.  There are currently no existing cultivars of 
downy rattlesnake plantain.    

Prepared By  
R. Jay Ugiansky; USDA, NRCS, Norman A. Berg 
National Plant Materials Center 

Citation 
Ugiansky, R. 2010. Plant fact sheet for downy rattlesnake 
plantain (Goodyera pubescens). USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Norman A. Berg 
National Plant Materials Center. Beltsville, MD 20705. 

Published:  February, 2010 

Edited:   

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

