 

 

 

 
FOWL MANNAGRASS 
Glyceria striata (Lam.) Hitchc. 

Plant Symbol = GLST 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, Oregon  
 

 

  Plant Fact Sheet

is food for waterfowl and birds while the foliage and tall stems 
provide good wildlife cover.  Foliage is seasonally grazed at a 
light to heavy rate by deer, muskrat, and bears.  Elk can make 
minor use of it as well.  Fowl mannagrass may be applicable 
to seeding mixtures targeted to improve species richness and 
exclude reed canarygrass (Phalaris arundinacea) prior to its 
invasion.  It is occasionally planted as an ornamental in and 
around backyard ponds. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current status 
(e.g. threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description and Adaptation 
In the Pacific Northwest, fowl mannagrass is a long-lived, 
cool season perennial bunchgrass with somewhat succulent 
stems (culms) that reach a height of 100 to 180 cm.  The form 
is erect, robust, and clumpy despite the production of slow 
growing rhizomes or underground stems.  Rate of spread may 
vary among populations.  Leaf blades are soft, ribbon-like, 6 
to 12 mm wide and 15 to 25 cm long.  The flowerhead 
(panicle) is loose, broad, pyramid-like, and 8 to 27 cm long 
with spreading and drooping branches.   Populations 
previously described for G. striata include plants that are 
shorter and tougher with smaller leaves (2 to 5 mm wide) and 
flower heads that are more closed.  G. striata occurs across 
most of North America. 
 

 

Photo by Dale Darris, USDA NRCS Corvallis PMC. 
 
Alternative Names 
Alternate Common Names:  tall mannagrass 
Alternate Scientific Names:  Glyceria elata, Glyceria nervata, 
Glyceria striata ssp. stricta, Glyceria striata var. stricta, 
Panicularia nervata, Panicularia striata 
 
Uses 
Fowl mannagrass is a rapidly establishing native species 
suitable for restoration of swamps, the edges of marshes, 
ponds, and streams, and other wetland plant communities 
where an herbaceous understory is desired.   It has versatility 
for use along creeks and ditch bottoms where exposure may 
vary from full sun to dense shade, thereby improving soil 
stability beyond the use of woody plants alone.  Where this 
species dominates, herbage production is high.  Palatability of 
G. striata is rated good to very good for cattle and horses 
which consume both flower stems and leaves.  It is rated fair 
to good for sheep which tend to use only the leaves.  The seed 

 

 

Fowl mannagrass distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database. 
Key to identification: Fowl mannagrass can be easily confused 
with reed mannagrass (Glyceria grandis), which has smoother 
leaves and lacks its slightly rough texture.  Others 
mannagrasses are easier to distinguish, but a botanical key 
should be consulted. 

 

is about 37 live seeds per square foot.  Seeding rates depend 
on methods used, objectives, and site conditions. 
 
Management 
Sites where fowl mannagrass occurs are typically too wet for 
grazing when the herbage is most succulent. Therefore, access 
must be deferred until late in the season when soils are drier 
and quality has declined somewhat. Tolerance to fire and 
heavy grazing is not well documented.   Fowl mannagrass can 
be grown for seed on upland sites with medium to fine 
textured soils if regular irrigation is applied in summer and 
fall. 

Pests and Potential Problems 
Glyceria striata is susceptible to fungal pathogens such as 
Epichloe glyceriae, which causes floral castration, and 
Ustilago striiformis, better known as stripe smut.  Fungicides 
may be needed for control.  Consult with your local Extension 
Service agent, plant disease control handbook, or other experts 
for advice.   
 
Environmental Concerns 
Some strains or populations of G. striata may contain 
cynogenetic compounds.  Cyanide poisoning has been 
reported in cattle from both fowl and reed mannagrass, so 
caution is advised for livestock utilization. Other species of 
mannagrass are described as weedy in certain crops or wet 
areas, but concerns for fowl mannagrass are not widely 
known. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area of 
origin) 
Seed sources and plants are regularly available throughout 
much of the United States. 
 
Prepared By:  
Dale Darris, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, Corvallis, 
Oregon   
Citation 
Darris, D. 2005. Plant fact sheet for fowl mannagrass 
(Glyceria striata). USDA-Natural Resources Conservation 
Service, Plant Materials Center, Corvallis, OR. 
Published January 2005 
Edited: 21Mar2006 jsp, 17Sep2008 dcd; 19Sep2008 jsp; 17Feb2012 aym 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation District 
<http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the PLANTS Web site 
<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials Program Web 
site <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

 

 

 

Line drawing of fowl mannagrass reprinted with permission, University of 
Washington Press. 
 
Relative abundance in the wild: Seed ripens in July or August 
and retention within the flower head is fair to good.  
Collections can be readily made along wet forest road ditches, 
but access can be difficult along streams or in denser, swampy 
brush where this species is commonly found. 
  
Adaptation: Fowl mannagrass occurs widely in bogs, seeps, 
wet woods, thickets or swampy areas, shaded ditches, and 
along or in streams.  It may occasionally be found growing in 
full sun on summer damp soils as well as in standing water.  
Reportedly, this species is best adapted to freshwater, semi-
aquatic habitats (G. elata) or those that are irregularly to 
seasonally flooded and saturated for up to 25% of the growing 
season (G. striata).  However, some plants have been 
observed to thrive and flower under continuous inundation (1-
10 cm) for several years.  Fowl mannagrass tolerates open 
areas but prefers shady habitats.  It may occur as single plants, 
small colonies, or larger stands that dominate the understory 
of ash swales as well as willow, aspen, and other wetland 
forest or shrub communities.  Soils range from organic to 
mineral with a pH of 4 (acidic) to 8 (slightly alkaline).  This 
species does not tolerate salinity and needs moderately good 
fertility.  This species is very shade tolerant, similar to reed 
mannagrass, yet it can be grown in full sun to produce 
substantial seed.  
 
Establishment 
The presence of seed dormancy, if any, may vary among 
populations.  Seeds can germinate within two to three weeks 
without treatment, but 14 to 30 days of cold moist 
stratification (moist pre-chilling) has resulted in faster 
germination, although not necessarily higher rates.  Others 
report the need for 150 days of stratification in cold water.   
Fall sowing is preferred if dormancy is known or uncertain.  
Seed hulls readily detach but removal is unnecessary.  There 
are approximately 1,600,000 seeds per pound with hulls intact.  
A seeding rate of one pound pure live seed per acre will result 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

