BLANKETFLOWER 
Gaillardia aristata Pursh 

Plant Symbol = GAAR 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS Bridger Plant Materials 
Center, Bridger, Montana 

 

Gaillardia aristata, Susan R. Winslow, Bridger PMC 

Alternate Names 
Indian blanketflower, common gaillardia, gaillardia 

Uses 
Blanketflower is a native perennial wildflower useful for 
adding species diversity in native plant seed mixes for 
rehabilitation of disturbed sites. It can be used in 
producing native wildflower sod for restoration of native 
plant colonies. Blanketflower is suitable for use as an 
ornamental wildflower in low maintenance or naturalistic 
landscapes. It has utility as a cover and food source for 
pollinators, wildlife, and livestock. 

Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Description and Adaptation 
Blanketflower is a native, perennial, tap-rooted 
wildflower with showy, yellow ray flowers and reddish-
brown central disk flowers. The pubescent plants vary 
from 10 to 24 inches in height. Leaves are arranged 
alternately along the stem and are 3 to 6 inches long with 
margins that are coarsely-toothed and deeply divided. 
Blanketflower grows on sunny, well-drained sites in 

 
 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

prairie meadows up to grassy openings in the mountains. 
It has an extensive bloom period beginning in early 
summer. 

It does well on a variety of soil types, including loams to 
rocky to gravelly-sandy textures; and tolerates a soil pH 
range from slightly acidic to mildly alkaline. 
Blanketflower attains optimum growth in full sun, 
beginning in early spring until seed set in late summer. It 
occurs at elevations from 1,300 to 9,000 ft. 
 

 

 

Blanketflower distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database 

For updated distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 

Establishment 
Blanketflower may be grown from seed or division of 
vegetative parts. The seed does not require cold 
stratification treatment to break dormancy. For range 
plantings, seed should be planted into a firm, weed-free 
seedbed, preferably with a mechanical drill that will 
ensure uniform seed placement depth of ¼- to ½-inch. 
There are approximately 220,700 seeds in one pound of 
blanketflower. The full seeding rate is 5 pounds pure live 
seed/acre, but it would seldom be seeded in a pure stand. 
It is recommended that blanketflower be included as a 
component of a native seed mixture at a rate not to exceed 
½ to 1 pound pure live seed/acre. When used in a mix, 
adjust the seeding rate to the desired percentage of mix. 
Spring seeding is preferred over late summer or dormant, 
fall planting dates. 

Seed production fields should be established in rows at 25 
pure live seeds per lineal foot of row. Between-row 
spacing is dependent on the type of planting and 

 

cultivation equipment, and ranges from 24 to 36 inches. 
Adequate between-row space should be provided to 
perform mechanical cultivation. At 24-inch row spacing, 
the recommended seeding rate is 2.5 pounds pure live 
seed/acre, and at 30- and 36-inch row spacing, the seeding 
rate is 2.2 and 1.9 pounds pure live seed/acre, 
respectively. There are presently no herbicides 
specifically labeled to control weeds in seed production 
fields of this species. Seed harvest can be accomplished 
by direct combining when the seeds have just begun to 
shatter from the radiate flower head. Immediately after 
combining, spread out harvested material to dry and 
prevent mold. Due to the persistent hairy pappus, and 
poor seed flow, this species is fairly difficult to clean. 
Seeds are moderately viable and longevity can be 
expected for several years when stored at favorable 
temperatures and low humidity. Meriwether Germplasm 
blanketflower yielded approximately 150 bulk pounds of 
seed per acre in experimental irrigated plots at the Bridger 
Plant Materials Center (BPMC) on an average harvest 
date of July 29. Seed production is expected to be much 
higher when grown under conventional agronomic 
conditions. 

conditions. Periodic mowing during the establishment 
year is one option for weed suppression. 

Pests and Potential Problems 
Blanketflower has no serious insect or disease problems. 
Root rot may be a problem in poorly drained soils, 
especially during extended periods of heavy rain. 
Powdery mildew may be present at times of elevated 
humidity, but usually does not have a long-term negative 
impact on the plants. The species generally is susceptible 
to aster yellows and fungal leaf spot disease. Gaillardia is 
slightly susceptible to oat blue dwarf virus. 

Environmental Concerns 
Blanketflower plants tend to be moderately long-lived and 
may re-seed in abundance. A skin rash or irritation may 
develop following contact with juice or sap from the 
foliage. 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
Meriwether Germplasm Selected Class blanketflower was 
released in 2011 by the BPMC in cooperation with the 
agricultural experiment stations of Montana State 
University and the University of Wyoming. Meriwether 
Germplasm is a composite of seed collections from 14 
Montana counties and one county in Wyoming. 

Prepared By 
Susan R. Winslow 
USDA-NRCS Plant Materials Center 
Bridger, Montana 

Citation 
Winslow, S. 2011. Plant fact sheet for blanketflower 
(Gaillardia aristata). USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Plant Materials Center. Bridger, 
MT, 59014. 

 

Seed production field in Montana Susan R. Winslow Bridger PMC 

Published August, 2011 

Blanketflower seed may be planted directly in containers 
without pre-treatment for greenhouse production. Seeds 
dry stored for three months or more do not require a cold 
stratification to overcome dormancy. However, a brief 
period of a cold, moist stratification improves germination 
uniformity. In a 10 in3 cone-tainer, a tight root mass is 
expected to develop in approximately four months. 
Containerized material should be transplanted after the 
last killing frost in the spring in advance of hot, dry 
weather, and no later than 30 to 45 days before the first 
killing frost in the fall of the year. 

Management 
Blanketflower is tolerant of drought and requires 
supplemental moisture only during extended hot and dry 

Edited: [25July2011 srw; 26July2011 jsj;26July2011 jds; 
01August2011 jab; 01September2011 hh; 
13September2011 rmg]. 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov>. 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

