 

 

 

 

PUGET SOUND 

GUMWEED 

Grindelia integrifolia DC. 

Plant Symbol = GRIN 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials 
Center, Oregon 

Photo by Amy Bartow, NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials Center, 2009 

 

Alternative Names 
Alternate Common Names:  Willamette Valley gumweed, 
Puget Sound gumplant, entire-leaved gumweed, gum 
plant, gum weed, resinweed 
Alternate Scientific Names:  Grindelia integrifolia DC. 
var. integrifolia  

Uses 
Puget Sound gumweed can be used in prairie and wetland 
restoration projects, pollinator enhancement plantings, 
hedgerows, and is a good plant for reclaiming seaside 
land.  It is also an attractive ornamental for use in 
wildflower meadows, butterfly gardens, and gardens close 
to the coast.  Several tribes in the Pacific Northwest 
extracted a resin from gumweed that was used to treat 
asthma, bronchitis, whooping cough, and dermatitis 
caused by poison ivy. 
This species is the dominant late-summer blooming plant 
in much of its native wetland prairie or salt marsh habitat, 
so it is serves as an important late-season source of pollen 
and nectar for butterflies, native bees, syrphid flies, wasps 
and other beneficial insects.  Willamette hybrid gumweed 
populations provide a critical pollen resource for an 
endemic native wetland-prairie solitary bee (Melissodes 
pullatela), and are the preferred nectar and extra-floral 
resin food source for the rare wetland great copper 

 

  Plant Fact Sheet

butterfly (Lycaena xanthoides) in the Willamette Valley 
of Oregon.   

Status 
Puget Sound gumweed is classified as a facultative 
wetland plant, meaning it usually occurs in wetlands, but 
is occasionally found in non-wetlands.  Please consult the 
PLANTS Web site and your State Department of Natural 
Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., threatened 
or endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland 
indicator values). 

Description and Adaptation 
Puget Sound gumweed, a member of the sunflower family 
(Asteraceae), is a native, perennial, tap-rooted, 
herbaceous to semi-woody subshrub that grows 8 to 40 
inches tall.  The stout, branched stems are leafy, upright 
or reclining on the ground but with tips ascending, and are 
generally covered in long, soft, shaggy but unmatted 
hairs.  Basal leaves are lance-shaped, slightly wider near 
the tip, with smooth or toothed edges, up to 16 inches 
long and 1½ inches wide.  Stem leaves are alternate, 
stalkless, often with clasping bases, up to 3 inches long, 
usually with smooth margins, and dotted with stalked 
glands that produce a sticky resin.  Immature flower heads 
ooze a sticky, white latex that gives them a milky 
appearance.  When open, the daisy-like flower heads are 1 
to 2 inches across and are composed of 10 to 35 yellow, 
petal-like ray flowers 1/3 to 4/5 inch long surrounding the 
yellow disk flowers in the center.  Below the flower head 
is a whorled cup of green bracts that are sticky-glandular 
with long, thin tips that are spreading or sometimes 
curved back from the flower head.  Fruits are small, wind-
borne achenes that are somewhat-flattened with a pappus 
of two to several firm but deciduous awns.  Plants flower 
from June to November.   
Grindelia integrifolia readily hybridizes with G. nana var. 
nana where the two species co-occur in the Willamette 
Valley of western Oregon.  Grindelia integrifolia x nana 
var. nana, commonly called Willamette hybrid gumweed, 
is locally common in spring-wet areas, dry pastures and 
roadsides.  Grindelia integrifolia also hybridizes with the 
coastal species G. stricta in the Puget Sound region of 
Washington.  
Puget Sound gumweed is a locally common wildflower 
found along beaches, rocky shores, wet meadows, 
wetland prairies, ditches, pastures and salt marshes.  It 
tolerates poor, sandy to clayey and saline soils, and 
prefers full sun to light shade and moist soil.  This species 
is distributed along the coast of Oregon, Washington, 
British Columbia, and the panhandle of Alaska, and 
inland in the Puget Trough of Washington through the 

Willamette Valley of Oregon at elevations below 650 ft.  
For updated distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 

 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
There are no developed cultivars of Puget Sound 
gumweed, but both non-certified and certified source 
identified seed is generally available from commercial 
sources.  Container plants are also sometimes available 
from native plant nurseries in the Pacific Northwest. 

Puget Sound gumweed distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS 
Database. 

 

Establishment 
Propagation is easiest from seed, and germination rates 
are generally high.  Seed can be sown in containers or 
directly on site in the fall or spring, and seedlings usually 
germinate in 2 to 3 weeks at 50-60°F.  The recommended 
single-species seeding rate is about 2 pounds per acre at a 
depth of ¼ to ½ inch, or about 0.25 lb/acre in a mix.  
There are approximately 128,000 seeds per pound, 
resulting in about 3 live seeds per square foot when 
seeded at a rate of one pound per acre.  Plants may also be 
propagated vegetatively by root or stem cuttings, but 
these methods are very labor-intensive and result in fairly 
low establishment rates.   

Management 
Once established, plants require little management. 

Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no known significant pests or diseases of Puget 
Sound gumweed. 

Environmental Concerns 
Established plants will readily self-sow and may spread 
into adjacent areas, so flower heads should be removed 
after blooming if spread is not desired. 

Photo copyright Gerald D. Carr, 2006 

 

Prepared By  
Annie Young-Mathews  
USDA-NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials Center, Oregon 

Citation 
Young-Mathews, A. 2012. Plant fact sheet for Puget 
Sound gumweed (Grindelia integrifolia). USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Corvallis Plant 
Materials Center, Corvallis, OR. 
Published April 2012 
Edited: 16Dec2011 dcd; 09Jan2012 klp; 17Apr2012 jab; 26Apr2012 gm  
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

