 

 

COMMON ST. 
JOHNSWORT 

Hypericum perforatum L. 

Plant Symbol = HYPE 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS Cape May Plant Materials 
Center 

 

Common St. Johnswort (Hypericum perforatum) Photo by, Jolie Dollar, 
USDA NRCS. 
 
Caution: This plant may become invasive. 
 
Alternative Names 
Common Alternate Names: 
Klamathweed 
St. Johnswort 
Klamath weed 
goatweed 
perforate St. John’s-wort 
Tipton weed 
rosin-rose 
 
Uses 
Wildlife Use: Common St. Johnswort provides a nectar 
source for pollinators and is well-suited for use in 
pollinator restoration habitat. Preliminary observation 
found that common St. Johnswort attracted 7 different 
species of Hymenoptera in Cape May, New Jersey. 
Brown-belted bumble bee, (Bombus griseocollis), 
common eastern bumble bee (Bombus impatiens), and 
sweat bee (Lasioglossum tegulare) were most frequently 
observed visiting the flower. Field observations suggest 
that pollinators exhibit a range of responses to this plant. 
There is not enough conclusive data to determine if the 
plant is highly preferred or less preferred among 
pollinators. 
 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

Erosion Control: 
With lateral root growth extending .4–3 in (1–8 cm) 
below the surface, and taproots extending 2–5 ft deep, St. 
Johnswort could make a good erosion control plant. 
However, the benefits of erosion control should be 
weighed against the plant’s overall aggressive, invasive 
characteristics.  
 
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., state noxious status, and wetland indicator 
values). 
 
Weediness 
St. Johnswort is an introduced species that is considered a 
noxious weed in 7 states in the U.S. Although the plant 
invades disturbed areas it does not easily invade natural 
areas. It tends to form dense colonies that crowd-out 
native plants. Please consult with your local NRCS Field 
Office, Cooperative Extension Service office, state natural 
resource, or state agriculture department regarding its 
status and use. Weed information is also available from 
the PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov. Please 
consult the Related Web Sites on the Plant Profile for this 
species for further information. 
 
Description and Adaptation 
Description: Common St. Johnswort is an erect, multi-
stemmed, perennial forb that grows to 1–3 ft. It has long 
slender “runners” or stems growing at the soil surface or 
just below the ground. It also has aggressive rhizomes. St. 
Johnswort is part of the family Hypericaceae which 
includes trees, shrubs, and herbs with resinous sap. 
 
The numerous flowers (roughly 25–100 per stem) are 
symmetrical around a central point, determinate, in flat-
top clusters. The short-stalked flowers are about 1 in 
across, with five yellow to bright yellow-orange flowers. 
The petals are peppered with black dots around the edges.  
 
Stems are often reddish and woody at the base. There may 
be several stems (up to 30) from the base of the plant. St. 
Johnswort has a tap root and vertical roots extending to 5 
ft.  
 
The 1–2 in long, stalk-less leaves are oblong or linear, 
opposite, round-tipped, and roughly ¼ in wide. The pale 
green or yellow-green leaves have scattered translucent 
dots that make the leaf look perforated when held up to 
the light. The species name for this plant, perforatum, 
denotes this characteristic.  
 

 

 

 

The sticky seed pod is a 3-sectioned capsule that turns 
deep reddish brown as it matures. The small (1 mm), 
round, darkly colored seeds have a resinous smell like 
turpentine. 

 

 

Common St. Johnswort (Hypericum perforatum) distribution from 
USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database. 
 
Adaptation: St. Johnswort is perhaps most commonly 
found in grasslands, pastures, meadows, and rangelands. 
But it also occurs in forested areas that have been 
disturbed by fire, logging, or road construction. Common 
St. Johnswort prefers well-drained, coarse-textured soils 
and does not grow well under wet conditions. St. 
Johnswort has been found to perform equally well in acid 
and calcareous soils. For updated distribution, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Es tablishment 
Common St. Johnswort is an early-flowing forb (June or 
July) that requires full sun or part shade. It can be 
propagated by seed, division, or by softwood cuttings. It 
grows well in moist, well-drained soils.  
 
First-year seedlings do not produce flowers or seeds. 
Seedlings are small and tend to grow slowly and are 
improved when inoculated with arbuscular mycorrhizal 
fungi. When favorable growing conditions are met, there 
may be a sudden increase in plant density and new sprouts 
will create dense mats around the base of parent plant. 
Interspecies competition will restrict seedling survival. 
Poor site quality appears to be associated with increased 
vegetative propagation. 
 
Management 
Common St. Johnswort does not exhibit invasive 
tendencies in undisturbed areas, but in disturbed areas it is 

much more dominant. St. Johnswort can be potentially 
invasive in prairie, mountain grassland, western 
hardwoods, maple-beech-birch complex, oak-hickory and 
oak-pine complexes. Repeated cultivation has been found 
to destroy the weed. Colonies can also be controlled by 
mowing several times before maturation. Additionally, a 
covering of grass litter may be used to reduce germination 
and shoot extension of St. Johnswort. Vegetative 
propagation may be encouraged by grazing or fire. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems  
Winter warming and summer droughts increase 
herbivory. Insect herbivory has a strong negative effect on 
populations and when treated with insecticide, treated 
plots have twice the seedling survival rates as untreated 
plots. There is a high degree of phenotypic and genotypic 
variation between St. Johnswort populations, and 
herbivore resistance is also variable. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
 
Common St. Johnswort has small black glands that 
contain the photodynamic pigment hypericin. Hypericins 
are found in the flowers, leaves, and buds of the plant. If 
digested by livestock, hypericin can cause 
photosensitization, blisters, and lesions; especially in 
light-skinned animals. More severe symptoms include 
loss of appetite, diarrhea, blindness, convulsions, coma 
and death.  
 
Control 
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use it safely. Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method. 
 
Prepared By: Christopher M. Sheahan. USDA-NRCS, 
Cape May Plant Materials Center, Cape May, NJ. 
 
Citation: Sheahan, C.M. 2012. Fact sheet for common St. 
Johnswort (Hypericum perforatum). USDA-NRCS, Cape 
May Plant Materials Center. Cape May, NJ. 08210. 
 
Published July 2012 
 
Edited: 
 
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

US DA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

