BEACH HEATHER 
Hudsonia tomentosa Nutt 

Plant Symbol = HUTO 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS Cap May Plant Materials 
Center and Columbus Service Center, New Jersey  
 

Christopher F. Miller, USDA NRCS 
 
Alternate Names 
sand heather, woolly hudsonia, false heather, woolly 
beach heather 
 
Uses 
Beach heather is used in the restoration of sand dunes and 
coastal native plant communities.  It can also be used for 
developing low maintenance, salt tolerant landscapes near 
the shoreline. 
 
Status 
Beach heather is listed as either threatened or endangered 
in several states.  Please consult the PLANTS Web site 
and your State Department of Natural Resources for this 
plant’s current status (e.g. threatened or endangered 
species, state noxious status, and wetland indicator 
values). 
 
Description and Adaptation 
Beach heather is a low growing native shrub usually 3-8 
inches tall and finely branched.  Leaves are elongated and 
scale like, usually less than 0.125 inches long, and coated 
with soft, white, wooly hair. This plant has beautiful 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

yellow flowers that are 5-petaled and about 0.25 inches 
across. Blooming occurs on average from May through 
July and provides nectar for pollinator species. 
 
This plant is adapted to sand dunes, sandy pine woods, 
pine-barrens, and sand hills clearings.  Beach heather is 
much less tolerant of salt spray than the plants in the 
primary foredune (Dunegrass community) along the New 
Jersey coast.  Beach heather does not compete effectively 
with Dunegrass community plants that are growing on the 
exposed primary foredune.  Beach heather tends to grow 
in the backdune areas at an elevation of about 9 feet 
above sea level.  The backdune habitat is more protected 
from salt spray and sand movement than the primary 
foredune, but it is very dry.  Several of the plant species in 
the backdune, including beach heather, exhibit 
adaptations to dry conditions such as reduced leaf surface, 
prostrate growth, and leaf surfaces covered with hair or 
waxy covering to reduce water loss.  
 
Green sands are associated with beach heather growing in 
sand dunes in Alberta, Canada.  Green sands were 
consistently found in the buried phyllosphere and 
rhizosphere of beach heather, and on the surface to 
varying depths under the plants.   Nitrogen fixing blue-
green algae were isolated from the green sands.  Beach 
heather’s preference for an association with blue-green 
algae may relate to the ability of this dwarf shrub to grow 
on nutrient poor sand blowouts and dunes.  Also, in 
Alberta, a preliminary study showed that beach heather 
was associated with ectomycorrhizal symbionts at three 
active dune sites.  
 
Distribution: Beach heather occurs along the Atlantic 
Coast from Main to North Carolina, along the Great 
Lakes from New York to Minnesota and along Lake 
Champlain. Its range extends northwestward to Alberta, 
Canada.  For more information please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
 Establishment and Management 
Beach heather establishment and management guidelines 
have not been developed at the time of this publication.  
However, pervious reports indicate that beach heather is 
short-lived and fairly difficult to grow, but can be 
propagated from seed and cuttings.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Beach heather has not been observed to manifest any 
notable problems with pests.  In beach habitat, beach 
heather is sensitive to trampling, mechanical disturbances 
by off-road vehicles, and over shading by woody species.  
 

 
 

 

 

 

Environmental Concerns 
In various coastal locations in the mid-Atlantic, beach 
heather  has been observed to preclude other plants from 
growing in close proximity.  Coastal scientists suspect 
that beach heather is capable of producing allelopathic 
compounds to reduce competition from other species 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
There are no known commercial sources for this species, 
nor any developed cultivars 
 
Prepared By:   
William B. Skaradek  
USDA NRCS Columbus Service Center, Columbus, NJ 
Christopher Miller  
USDA NRCS Cape May Plant Materials Center, Cape 
May, NJ 
 
Species Coordinator:  
William B. Skaradek  
USDA NRCS Columbus Service Center, Columbus, NJ 
 
Published:  October 2009 
 
Edited: 08Sep09 rg, 08Sep09 jfh; 17Sep09 mws 
 
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

