YAUPON 

Ilex vomitoria Aiton  

Plant Symbol = ILVO 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS East Texas Plant Materials 
Center  

Photo courtesy:USDA/NRCS East Texas Plant Materials 
Center  

 

 Caution:  Ingestion of berries causes nausea and 
vomiting.  Yaupon is the only plant native to North 
America that contains caffeine. 

Alternate Names 
Yaupon holly, cassena, cassina, cassine, evergreen 
cassena, evergreen holly, Indian black drink, Christmas 
berry.   

Uses 
Ethnobotanical:  Native Americans in the southeastern 
United States used this plant extensively.  They used the 
wood to build arrows, and roasted leaves and shoots to 
make a dark, tea like drink called “black drink”.  This 
drink was used medicinally to induce vomiting and for 
ceremonies to purify the body.  It was also used socially 
as a drink or offering to indicate friendly intentions to 
guest. 
 
Landscaping:  Yaupon makes an excellent hedge plant.  It 
is an evergreen, and when trimmed correctly, produces a 
thick screen of vegetative material.  Individual specimens 
can be readily trimmed into ornamental designs and 
shapes.  Yaupon is adapted to a wide array of soils and 
climate conditions.  It is disease free, moderately fast 
growing, and tolerates drought extremely well once 
established.  Female plants produce numerous, showy red 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

berries in the fall as long as male plants are available for 
pollination.   
 
Wildlife:  Many species of song and game birds utilize the 
berries in the fall.  Small mammals such as raccoons, 
skunks, foxes, and armadillos will also consume berries.  
Deer browse the foliage, but it is not considered preferred 
browse.  Yaupon is capable of forming dense, monotypic, 
thickets, which provide excellent cover for a wide array of 
wildlife, especially in winter after most plants have 
dropped their leaves.                   

Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Description and Adaptation 
Yaupon is a native, perennial, evergreen shrub capable of 
reaching approximately 30 feet in height under ideal 
conditions.  The bark is smooth, light grey with lighter 
grey to nearly white splotches.  The leaves are alternate 
and oval in shape.  They are dark green with a leathery 
appearance and a lighter colored underside.  The leaf 
margins have a slight serration that easily distinguishes 
this species from the similar looking, invasive, non-
native, Chinese privet, Ligustrum sinense Lour. Chinese 
privet has come to occupy a similar niche in the 
environment since it was introduced through the 
horticulture and landscape industry in the late 1800s.     
 
Yaupon fruits are small berries with a beautiful, 
translucent, red color.  They form in dense clusters 
throughout the plant and remain attached through winter 
and into spring making them an important winter food 
source for a variety of bird species.  Each fruit contains 4 
hard, oblong seeds or nutlets that have a striated 
appearance.          

Yaupon can be found throughout the southeastern United 
States, especially along the coastal plains, on soils with 
pH between 4.5 and 7.0.  It is adapted to a wide variety of 
soils textures, but typically prefers sandy sites.  It is shade 
tolerant and moderately tolerant to salinity and salt spray.  
Fire and prescribed burns reduce its presence in the 
understory.         

 
 

 

 

Cutting  will  compound  the  plant  density  exponentially 
unless  stumps  are  treated  with  an  herbicide  immediately 
after they are cut.     

Pests and Potential Problems 
Yaupon has no serious pest or disease problems. 

Environmental Concerns 
None. 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
Yaupon is readily available through the commercial 
nursery industry.  There are no released varieties from the 
USDA/NRCS Plant Materials Program. 

Prepared By: R. Alan Shadow, USDA NRCS East Texas 
Plant Materials Center, Nacogdoches, Texas. May 2011 

Citation 
Shadow, Robert, A.  2011Plant fact sheet for Yaupon, Ilex 
vomitoria. USDA-Natural Resources Conservation 
Service, East Texas Plant Materials Center, Nacogdoches, 
TX, 75964. 

Edited:  

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Yaupon distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database. 

Establishment 
Yaupon is most easily established via transplants.   It is 
found readily in the wild, and may be dug in the spring 
and fall to avoid the stress of summer heat.  Small 
saplings may then be moved to desired locations or potted 
for later use.  Containerized plants are also available from 
the nursery industry.  Yaupon is a hardy plant that 
transplants well.  Trimming the tops of freshly dug plants 
will help reduce stress via moisture loss.  Seed is reported 
to take up to 18 months to germinate and requires cold 
stratification.  They should be sown in flats in the fall, and 
left outside to over winter.  Transplants may be removed 
from the seedling tray as they appear.  Yaupon does not 
require high fertility, but application of a complete 
fertilizer such as 13-13-13 will increase the speed of 
establishment and promote quicker growth.  Always be 
sure to water transplant in after planting to reduce stress 
and to create good soil to root contact.           

Management 
When used as an ornamental or hedge, keep plants 
watered and fertilized for maximum performance.   
Frequent, light watering will promote shallow root 
development.  Longer, less frequent watering intervals 
promote deeper root development and a more drought 
resistant plant.  Trimming will encourage regrowth and 
creates a densely limbed shrub.  Lower limbs may be 
removed on specimen trees to expose the lightly colored 
bark which provides an attractive contrast with the dark 
green foliage.     
 
Yaupon  can  be  aggressive  and  is  capable  of  forming 
dense monotypic stands, especially in cutover timberland 
in  the  southern  states,  which  may  compete  with  tree 
seedling establishment. This can shade out desirable tree 
plantings.    As  previously  stated,  Yaupon  is  not  fire 
tolerant.    As  fire  frequency  increases,  this  species  will 
decrease.    Yaupon  spreads  via  root  suckers  when  cut.  

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

