BIG DEERVETCH 

Lotus crassifolius (Benth.) Greene 

Plant Symbol = LOCR 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials 
Center 

Big deervetch in flower, © G. D. Carr, 2006. 

 

Alternate Names 
Alternative common names:  buck lotus, broad leaved 
lotus, thick-leaved lotus, thickleaf trefoil, thickleaf bird's-
foot trefoil, Otay Mountain lotus (=L. crassifolius var. 
otayensis)  
Alternative scientific names: Hosackia crassifolia; Lotus 
aboriginus (=Lotus crassifolius var. subglaber) 

Uses 
Wildlife/livestock forage: The seed and foliage of big 
deervetch are eaten by elk, black-tailed deer, quail and 
other game birds, nongame birds and small mammals.  
Plants are palatable to livestock and withstand grazing 
with the help of their perennial roots and rhizomes.  
Crude protein content is generally high (8–18%), 
especially on grazed clear-cut test plots.    

 
 

 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

Pollinators: The flowers attract hummingbirds, 
butterflies, honeybees and native bees, and can be 
incorporated into hedgerow or pollinator plantings.  The 
plant also serves as a larval food source for butterflies 
such as the silver spotted skipper. 
Restoration/erosion control: Big deervetch is an early 
colonizer of disturbed areas, and because it is a 
rhizomatous legume it stabilizes soil while adding 
essential nitrogen and organic carbon to depleted soils.  
Plants often volunteer on bare road cuts, and can be 
direct-seeded or established from root cuttings onto 
disturbed sites such as old roadbeds, road cuts, clear-cuts, 
fire-damaged land, stream banks and pastures for erosion 
control cover and critical area plantings. 

Status 
The Otay Mountain variety of big deervetch is ranked 1B 
by the California Native Plant Society (Plants Rare, 
Threatened, or Endangered in California and Elsewhere) 
because its occurrence is limited to a few highly restricted 
populations in California.  Variety crassifolius is common 
and widespread.  Please consult the PLANTS Web site 
and your State Department of Natural Resources for this 
plant’s current status (e.g., threatened or endangered 
species, state noxious status, and wetland indicator 
values). 

Description and Adaptation 
Fabaceae (Pea family): Big deervetch is a robust, native, 
herbaceous, perennial legume.  Plants are winter dormant, 
even in mild growing climes.  They can easily regenerate 
from lateral roots and rhizomes, as well as deep taproots 
that may later become exposed near the soil surface 
following disturbance.  Plants are sprawling to erect, 1–5 
feet tall, and stems have a hollow base.  Compound leaves 
have 7–23 leaflets that are about 1 inch long, elliptic to 
egg-shaped, generally 1–2.5 times longer than wide, 
bright green on the upper surface and paler below.  
Flowers are arranged in umbels of 7–20 small (about ½ 
inch), yellow-green, pea-like flowers that become dark 
red or purple-blotched with age.  A tubular, lobed calyx 
half encloses the petals and gives the inflorescences a 
pink to deep red color.  Fruits are oblong (1.4–2.8 inches 
long by 0.1–0.2 inch wide) and hairless, with several dark 
brown seeds per pod.  Bloom period extends from May to 
August depending on latitude and elevation, with seeds 
generally ripening late June to September.  There are two 
varieties of big deervetch: var. otayensis is covered in 
long, soft, wavy hairs, while var. crassifolius is hairless or 
has straight, stiff, sharp hairs that lay flat against the stem.  
There was formerly another recognized variety of big 
deervetch, var. subglaber, but this is now generally 

 

considered a separate species, L. aboriginus (=Hosackia 
rosea), rosy bird’s-foot trefoil.  Lotus aboriginus can be 
distinguished from L. crassifolius by its lower elevation 
coast range distribution (below 2600 ft), smaller stature 
(0.3–2.3 ft), leaflet length 2–3 times width, fewer flowers 
per inflorescence (6–10), and white flowers tinged with 
red or purple.  
Big deervetch is common in openings in chaparral, pine 
or mixed woodlands, as well as on stream banks, 
disturbed areas and roadsides.  It is a fast grower that does 
best in full sun on fine- to medium-textured, well-drained 
soils.  It grows in areas with 14–80 inches mean annual 
precipitation, but is drought-tolerant and tolerates 
temperatures down to -3°F.  Plants are fire-stimulated, 
germinating readily from the seed bank, even after intense 
fires.  Its native range includes southwestern Washington, 
western Oregon, California and Baja California, Mexico 
at elevations up to 8000 feet.  Variety otayensis is found 
only on Otay Mountain, San Diego County, CA and into 
Baja California.  For updated distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site. 

Big deervetch distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database. 

 

Establishment 
Big deervetch seed has combined dormancy, meaning it 
has both physical and physiological inhibitions to 
germination, so seed should be scarified by mechanical 
abrasion of the seed coat, and stratified by moist chilling 
prior to sowing.  Seed can be scarified in a Forsberg seed 
scarifier with 220 grit sandpaper for 10 to 15 seconds in 
order to overcome physical seed coat dormancy, followed 
by cold-moist stratification for at least 60–90 days to 
overcome the physiological dormancy.  With these 
treatments, germination rates can reach 80-85% for good 
seed lots.  Treatment with boiling water has been 
proposed as an alternative to mechanical scarification in 
some Lotus species, but further testing is required to 
evaluate the success of these treatments on big deervetch 

germination.  Scarified seed can be direct-seeded in the 
fall to stratify in situ, germinating in the spring when the 
soil begins to warm.  Like most legumes, establishment 
success, plant vigor and nodulation will be improved by 
inoculating seed prior to sowing.  This can be 
accomplished by making a slurry from soil and/or root 
nodules of existing big deervetch (or similar) plants, or 
purchasing rhizobia (nitrogen-fixing soil bacteria) 
inoculants from a commercial source.  Seedlings are often 
slow to establish initially, so a good weed management 
plan should be in effect prior to planting in order to 
minimize competition.  There are about 48,600 seeds per 
pound.  Sown alone, the suggested seeding rate is 4–8 
pure live seed (PLS) pounds per acre, or 4–8 seeds per 
square foot.  
Management 
Plants require little management once established; they 
are long-lived, drought-tolerant, and re-sprout or 
germinate readily after fire and other major disturbances. 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Pocket gophers can do significant damage to plantings of 
big deervetch.  There are no other records of specific pest 
or disease problems, but plants may be expected to be 
susceptible to insect pests and diseases similar to those 
found on other native Lotus species. 
Environmental Concerns 
There are no known environmental concerns associated 
with big deervetch. 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
There are no improved or selected materials of big 
deervetch, but container plants and/or seed are sometimes 
available from commercial sources on the West coast. 
Prepared By  
Anna Young-Mathews and Dale Darris  
USDA-NRCS Plant Materials Center, Corvallis, Oregon 

Citation 
Young-Mathews, A., and D. Darris. 2011. Plant fact sheet 
for big deervetch (Lotus crassifolius). USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, OR. 
Published September 2011 
Edited: [30Aug2011 klp; 06Sep2011 jab] 
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

