            Plant Fact Sheet  

 

PRAIRIE BLAZING 

STAR 

Liatris pycnostachya Michx. 

Plant Symbol = LIPY 

 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Elsberry Plant 
Materials Center 

Jim Stasz 
USDA NRCS PLANTS 

 
Alternate Names 
gayfeather 

stems grow erect to a height of 5 feet.  The narrow 
leaves on the lower two-thirds of the plant are so 
crowded that to the casual observer they may appear 
spiraled rather than closely alternate.  Lower leaves, 
up to 4 inches long and ½ inch wide, are larger than 
those further up the stems.  Both the leaves and stems 
usually display short, stiff hairs.  

The top two-thirds of prairie blazing star is a spike of 
rose-purple, thistle-like flowers that are given a 
somewhat fuzzy appearance by extended white 
stamens (male flower parts) and pistils (female 
flower parts).  Flowering starts at the top of the spike 
and moves progressively downward.  Each flower 
head along the spike is made up of 5 to 12 tubular 
florets.  A dense circle of bracts (tiny, modified 
leaves) surrounds the base of each flower head.  The 
tips of these long, pointed bracts tend to spread and 
curve back toward their bases.  Bracts of this species 
may have a purplish tinge.  
 

All Liatris produce flowers in wand-like spikes or 
racemes.  Their flowers are produced in late summer 
and autumn.  They multiply by offsets from their 
cormlike base, or may be grown from seed, which 
should be sown in autumn.  They will grow and 
produce flowers in poorer soil than most garden 
plants, but thrive best in good, rich garden soil, and 
require no special care.  The showiest species are 
Liatris elegans and Liatris pycnostachya.  The 
slender seeds of Liatris are usually less than 1/4 inch 
long.  The seed narrows toward the base and is tipped 
with a set of soft bristles about as long as the seed 
itself.  There are 10 ribs or ridges running along the 
length of the seed.  Prairie blazing star seeds per 
pound average 131,000. 

Adaptation and Distribution 
Prairie blazing star is found throughout the tall grass 
prairie biome, often in thick stands on damp prairies 
and open bottomlands from Minnesota and 
Wisconsin south. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 

 

 

 

Uses 
Prairie blazing star can be used for prairie restoration 
and landscaping, roadside plantings, wildlife food 
and habitat, wildflower gardens (because of its 
attractive flowers), and as a small component in 
seeding mixtures. 

Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

 

 

 

Description 
Prairie blazing star is a hardy, native perennial herb 
that grows from a tuber.  It is one of the most 
conspicuous of the prairie inhabitants, as its leafy 
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 

Establishment 
Prepare a clean weed free seedbed by disking and 
harrowing or using chemical weed control.  Firm the 
seedbed by cultipacking.  Seedbed should be firm 
enough to allow seed to be planted ¼ inch deep.  For 

prairie restoration or diverse plantings for wildlife, 
prairie blazing star can be incorporated into seed 
mixes at a rate of 4 ounces pure live seed/acre.  Use 
unstratified seed in fall and stratified seed in the 
spring.  A seeder with a legume box works well in 
the seeding operation, although other types of seeders 
or drills maybe used.  Apply no fertilizer the 
establishment year unless a soil test indicates a severe 
deficiency of phosphorus and potassium.  Use no 
nitrogen during the establishment year as this can 
encourage weed competition. 

Seedling vigor is good and stands are comparatively 
easy to establish where competition is controlled. 

Management 
During establishment, reduce weed competition by 
mowing above the height of the prairie blazing star or 
using approved herbicides.  In established stands, 
prescribed burning may be appropriate where plant 
vigor declines or where invader species threaten 
native mix stands. 

Pests and Potential Problems 
Medium to severe lodging has been documented 
when growing prairie blazing star in a monoculture 
planting. 

 
Environmental Concerns 
Prairie blazing star is not considered weedy or an 
invasive species and has not been noted spreading to 
adjoining areas.  Seedlings have not been noted 
spreading from original plantings or if they do 
spread, the rate of spread is not alarming. 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Two source identified composites of prairie blazing 
star from northern and central Iowa were released in 
1999 by the Elsberry, Missouri Plant Materials 
Center.  The cultivar ‘Eureka’ (Kansas) was released 
in 1975 by the Manhattan, Kansas Plant Materials 
Center.    

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Prepared By & Species Coordinators:  
Jimmy Henry, Manager 
Steven Bruckerhoff, Assistant Manager 
Elsberry Plant Materials Center 
Elsberry, Missouri 

Jerry Kaiser, Plant Materials Specialist 
USDA NRCS, Elsberry, Missouri 

Edited: 04Dec2001 JLK; 060802 jsp 
 

For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or Conservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

 

The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national origin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 

To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 

Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation 
Service.  

 

 

