RIVERBANK LUPINE 
Lupinus rivularis Douglas ex 

Lindl. 

Plant Symbol = LURI 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials 
Center, Oregon 

 

Photo by Amy Bartow, NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials Center, 2008 
Alternate Names 
Alternative Common Names: riverside lupine, streambank 
lupine, stream lupine, nine finger  
Alternative Scientific Names: Lupinus lignipes A. Heller, 
Lupinus amphibium Suksd. 

Uses 
Erosion control: Given riverbank lupine’s rapid growth, it 
can be used as quick cover on critical erosion sites, 
including droughty, steep, low-fertility slopes.  Because 
of the species’ ability to add nitrogen to the soil (through 
N-fixing bacteria), it can also facilitate the establishment 
of grasses and other wildflowers in restoration seedings. 
Wildlife and Livestock: Several species of birds use the 
seed for food.  Birds, rabbits, and other small game use 
the abundant stems for cover.  The flowers provide pollen 
and nectar for bumblebees and other native pollinators 
and beneficial insects.  This species is a potential butterfly 
host plant for the orange sulphur (Colias eurytheme) and 
the western tailed blue (Everes amyntula).  Riverbank 
lupine appears to be compatible with livestock grazing as 
it has low levels of alkaloids, and does not contain 
anagyrine, a compound found in many other lupines that 
causes the birth defect known as ‘crooked calf disease’.  
Likewise, the cultivar ‘Hederma’ produced no toxic 

 
 

 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

symptoms in sheep or calves in a feeding trial, and was 
found to contain very low concentrations of alkaloids. 
Cover Crop: For soil enrichment through nitrogen 
fixation and addition of organic matter, riverbank lupine 
can be seeded as a winter cover and green manure crop, or 
used in reforestation projects.  From laboratory assays, 
nitrogen fixation rates of its root nodules appear high, but 
actual levels of increase in field soil nitrogen have not 
been fully quantified.  
Ornamental: The plant’s showy floral display and 
pleasant scent make it appropriate for certain landscape 
uses along roadsides, around residential areas, and within 
parks where a larger, short-lived wildflower is desired. 
Ethnobotanic: The plants are reported to have been used 
medicinally by the Thompson Indians of British 
Columbia.   

Status 
Riverbank lupine is on red list 1-E (endangered) in British 
Columbia, but is fairly common throughout the rest of its 
range.  It is considered a facultative upland plant (usually 
occurring in non-wetlands, but occasionally found in 
wetlands) in the northwest, but a facultative plant (equally 
likely to occur in wetlands or non-wetlands) in California.  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Description and Adaptation 
Riverbank lupine is a native, rapid-developing, deep tap-
rooted, multi-stemmed, erect forb, 1 to 5 feet tall.  The 
plant may be an annual, biennial, or short-lived perennial.  
In Oregon, its habit can be like an evergreen subshrub.  At 
least some populations appear to possess few if any basal 
buds, with most new shoot growth arising primarily from 
aerial portions of the plant in the second year.  The leaves 
are alternate, palmately compound, with 5 to 9 leaflets 
that average 1½ inches long.  Attractive purple-blue to 
white pea-type flowers bloom March to July, depending 
on latitude and elevation, and last for about two to four 
weeks.  The sparsely hairy pods up to 2 inches long 
contain 6-10 seeds that are gray with dark mottling, often 
with a black stripe on each side.   
Riverbank lupine is adapted to well-drained, sandy or 
gravelly soils of Oregon and Washington west of the 
Cascades, southwestern British Columbia, and 
northwestern California at elevations below 6,000 feet in 
regions with a precipitation range of 18 to 100 inches.  
Persistence is best on soils low in nitrogen, such as sand 
dunes, cut slopes along roadsides, or dredge spoils, where 

competition is reduced.  Best growth and development are 
achieved when the plant is grown in full sun.  It is an 
excellent pioneer species.  For updated distribution, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species on 
the PLANTS Web site. 

 

 
Riverbank lupine distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database. 

Establishment 
Seed should be mechanically scarified or soaked in hot 
water (180°F) to overcome physical dormancy and 
enhance germination rates.  Establishment and subsequent 
growth may also be improved by inoculating with the 
appropriate rhizobia (N-fixing bacteria) prior to planting.  
Riverbank lupine can be seeded either in early fall or in 
the spring at 4 to 20 lbs/acre, depending on the site and 
seed mixture desired, at a depth of ½ to ¾ inch.  Strips for 
landscaping, hedgerows, or wildlife use can be broadcast 
seeded at about 20 lbs/acre.  For all conservation uses 
riverbank lupine can be seeded alone at about 10 lbs/acre, 
or with companion grass-legume mixtures, or into 
existing grass stands at 4 to 20 lbs/acre, depending upon 
need.  Seed production fields can be established on most 
well-drained tillable soils, and are typically planted at 10 
lbs/acre on 24-inch rows.  Summer-seeded, irrigated 
fields should produce a seed crop the following year, but 
fall or spring seeding (with or without irrigation) will not 
produce a seed crop until the second full growing season.  
Plants do not generally re-sprout after they are cut, so 
only one seed crop is produced.  There are between 
15,000 and 31,000 seeds per pound.       

Management 
Riverbank lupine often shades out weedy competitors 
with its rapid growth, and thus requires little weed control 
after establishment.  For seed production, the crop should 
be harvested just before fully mature to avoid excessive 
shatter.  It can be direct combined or windrowed onto 
tarps or paper rolls to dry.  Green seeds thus harvested 
have dried without any apparent loss in viability.  

Pests and Potential Problems 
Insect damage is significant only during seed production 
and is controlled with normal spray programs.  Adult 
diabrotic or striped cucumber beetles (Diabrotica 
trivittata) feed on leaves and blossoms, while lygus bugs 
(Lygus pratensis) cause damage by sucking out the juices 
of developing flowers and fruit.  Powdery mildew is 
common in some years, but is generally not considered a 
problem for wildlife or critical area plantings. 

Environmental Concerns 
It is unknown if all populations of riverbank lupine have 
low toxicity to livestock similar to the cultivar Hederma.  
Because of the production of “hard” seed, volunteer 
plants may appear in agricultural seed production fields a 
number of years after stand removal.  Riverbank lupine is 
known to hybridize extensively with the invasive yellow 
bush lupine (Lupinus arboreus), as well as the native 
seashore lupine (L. littoralis), and these hybrid swarms 
may displace or genetically swamp native stands of 
riverbank lupine.  Seed collection and propagation from 
these hybrids populations by wildflower enthusiasts poses 
a significant threat to the genetic integrity of the species.   

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
‘Hederma’ (Oregon) is a short-lived perennial; in its area 
of adaptation, it may survive three to four years, but it 
tends to act as a biennial.  It is intended for use in western 
Oregon, western Washington, and northwestern 
California, for sites up to 3,000 feet in elevation.  While 
the plant exhibits partial dieback primarily in the second 
winter, it has some evergreen stems and foliage.  This 
cultivar produces 20,000 to 25,000 seeds/lb.  Seed is 
available from several commercial producers or vendors. 

Prepared By  
Dale Darris and Annie Young-Mathews 
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center 
Corvallis, Oregon 

Citation 
Darris, D., and A. Young-Mathews. 2012. Plant fact sheet 
for riverbank lupine (Lupinus rivularis). USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Corvallis Plant 
Materials Center, Corvallis, OR. 

Published March 2012 

Edited: 13Sep2011 aym; 09Jan2012 klp; 13Jan2012 jab; 09Apr2012 aym 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

