TWINBERRY 

HONEYSUCKLE 

Lonicera involucrata (Richardson) 

Banks ex Spreng. 
Plant Symbol = LOIN5 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, Oregon 

 

Figure 1. Leaves and black berries of twinberry honeysuckle. Photo by 
Sonja Johnson.                      

Alternate Names 
Common alternative names:  Black twinberry, twinberry, 
bearberry honeysuckle, bush honeysuckle, bracted 
honeysuckle 
Scientific alternative names:  Lonicera involucrata var. 
involucrata, Distegia involucrata, and Xylosteum 
involucratum. 

Uses 
Conservation- Twinberry honeysuckle is a valuable shrub 
for streambank erosion control and restoration of riparian 
areas, swamps, bogs, moist woodlands, scrub-shrub 
wetlands, and sandy coastal areas within its native range.  
Winter dormant branches are useful as live stakes, 
fascines, and other soil bioengineering practices for 
stabilizing streambanks, moist slopes, and the immediate 
shoreline of lakes or ponds. The species is also used in 
hedgerows and pollution resistant wind shelters.  
 

 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

Wildlife - The berries are eaten by bears, small mammals, 
game birds including quail and grouse, and songbirds 
such as thrushes. The flower is a source of nectar for 
hummingbirds and butterflies. The plant is host for the 
larva of certain butterflies including Gillett’s 
checkermallow.  Value as general wildlife cover is high, 
but as browse its desirability is rated low for most large 
game animals.  However, elk, moose, mountain goats, and 
deer are reported to utilize the leaves or twigs in some 
areas. The species is rated as poor forage for domestic 
cattle and fair for sheep. 
 
Ethnobotanic – Reports on the fruit vary from poisonous, 
to mildly toxic, to bitter and unpalatable, to edible and 
useful as food, depending on tribe, region or publication.  
The berry was used as a source of dye. Medicinal uses 
were many and varied among tribes. These included the 
leaves, berries or bark as a decoction, infusion, or poultice 
for sores, body cleansing, swellings, dandruff,  wounds, 
infections, sore throats,  paralysis, coughs, burns, itches, 
venereal diseases, boils, stomach troubles, pains of the 
legs or feet, arthritis, and sore eyes.  Sometimes the leaves 
or bark were simply chewed for treating ailments or used 
as a ceremonial emetic (i.e. to induce vomiting). 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
Description and Adaptation 
Twinberry honeysuckle (family: Caprifoliaceae) is an 
upright deciduous shrub that grows up to 12 (16) ft tall.  
The leaves are in opposite pairs, egg or broadly lance 
shaped, pointed, and often hairy beneath.  The flowers are 
tubular, in pairs, and yellow (except for the orange-red 
tinted flowers for the coastal variety ledebourii). The 
double or “twin” shiny black berries that ripen in July or 
later are cupped by prominent purple-red colored bracts.              

Figure 2. Stem, leaves, fruit, and flower of twinberry honeysuckle. 

Reprinted with permission, University of Washington Press. 

 

Twinberry honeysuckle occurs from the sea coast to high 
elevations in alpine regions. It ranges from Alaska south 
to Mexico and west through the Rocky Mountain states, 
as well as most of Canada.  The species is adapted to soils 
that vary from course sand to fine textured silt and clay 
with a pH of 5 to 8 (moderately high acidity to slightly 
basic).  Found on moist, seasonally wet, and flooded sites, 
habitats include moist woods, thickets, riparian zones and 
bogs.  It also occurs in brackish tidal swamps and sandy 
areas along the coast.  While tolerant of full sun, 
twinberry honeysuckle is most commonly found under 
shady conditions. It will grow on upland soils with 
moderate fertility but drought tolerance is lacking. 
 

 

Figure 3. Twinberry honeysuckle distribution from USDA-NRCS 
PLANTS Database. 

Please consult the Plant Profile page for this species on 
the PLANTS Web site. 

Establishment 
Seed is obtained by collecting the ripe berries from July 
through September then macerating the fruit to separate 
the seed from the pulp. The seed should be cold moist 
stratified (moist chilled at 33-36°F) for 30 to 90 days in 
order to overcome embryo dormancy and improve 
germination.  Air dried seed can be stored in sealed 
containers under cool temperatures for up to 15 years. 
There is an average of 327,000 seeds per pound. 
Unstratified seed should be fall sown and covered with a 
thin layer of soil and 1-2 in. of organic mulch. 
 
Vegetative propagation in containers or beds is easy from 
hardwood (winter dormant), softwood (spring) and semi-
hardwood (summer) cuttings, or layering of stems if the 
soil or growth media is kept moist. Rooting hormones are 
generally not required, but may be helpful for some 
clones or populations.  In western Oregon and western 
Washington, establishment from direct installation of live 
stakes on streambanks and other moist revegetation sites 

in fall or winter has been moderately successful. Live 
stakes are unrooted, dormant 18 to 36 in. cuttings made 
from older branches and planted with at least 70 percent 
of the length in the soil. As with container or bareroot 
nursery stock, survival and growth are improved if stakes 
are mulched or irrigated the first full growing season, 
weeds are suppressed, and animal browse curtailed. 

Management 
Plants should be monitored for survival and pest problems 
the first few growing seasons and remedial action taken as 
needed. Brush cutting can be used as a management tool 
to increase or decrease the attractiveness of twinberry 
honeysuckle to browsing by ungulates in transportation 
corridors.  In British Columbia, cutting the shrubs in July 
results in less attractive fall and winter browse. 

Pests and Potential Problems 
Among the insect pests are aphids, serpentine leaf miners, 
and scales.  Disease problems have not been widely 
reported but may include those of other honeysuckles. 

Environmental Concerns 
The bitter ripe berries may be mildly toxic or poisonous to 
humans.  There is some suggestion the foliage or other 
plant parts may have a mildly toxic effect on cattle.  

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
There are no known cultivars or named selections. 
However, provenance testing and anecdotal observations 
show clear distinctions in bud break and growth patterns 
in northern versus southern and continental versus coastal 
sources of this species. Such differences are probably 
adaptive and reflect geographic origin. Thus, source of 
stock should be carefully considered for plantings.     

Prepared By  
Dale Darris, USDA NRCS, Corvallis Plant Materials 
Center 

Citation 
Darris, D. 2011. Plant fact sheet for twinberry 
honeysuckle  (Lonicera involucrata). USDA Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Corvallis, OR. 97330. 

Published September 2011 

Edited:  

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

