MANYSTEM WILDRYE 
Leymus multicaulis (Kar. & Kir.) 

 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Lockeford Plant Materials 
Center, California & Bridger Plant Materials Center, 
Montana 

Tzvelev 

Plant Symbol = LEMU11 

 

Leymus multicaulis, Susan R. Winslow, Bridger PMC 
 
Alternate Names 
Many-stem lyme grass, Elymus multicaulis 
 
Uses 
Manystem wildrye is primarily used for reclamation of 
wet, saline soils.  It can be used effectively on saline-
affected, irrigated cropland and pastureland, and on lands 
where the water table is within 3 ft of the soil surface.  It 
is also used for reclamation of saline seep discharge areas 
on dry cropland, where water tables are typically deeper 
than 3 ft and annual precipitation may range from 12 to 
18 inches.   
 
Manystem wildrye is also recommended for use as forage, 
soil stabilization for prevention of wind and water 
erosion, and in wildlife cover plantings.  It is moderately 
palatable to all livestock, especially in the early spring 
before it becomes coarse.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 

 
 

 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description and Adaptation 
Manystem wildrye is an introduced, perennial, cool-
season, sod-forming grass.  Plants spread by underground 
stems and by seed, sometimes forming distinct clumps, 
and flowering culms reach 19 to 32 inches tall.  Leaf 
blades are grayish green, stiff and flat early in the growth 
season, becoming rolled later in the year.  There are 
approximately 150,000 to 175,000 seeds/lb.   
 
In its native range in Eurasia, manystem wildrye is found 
in alkaline meadows and saline soils, and as a weed in 
fields, roadsides, and around human habitations.  In the 
intermountain West, it is adapted to wet, saline meadows, 
where rainfall exceeds 9 to 14 inches or where wet, 
saline-alkaline, sub-irrigated sites exist.  Manystem 
wildrye does well on moderately-coarse/sandy to poorly-
drained soils, and ranges from uplands and slopes to 
bottomlands.  It tolerates neutral to strongly alkaline soils 
(pH 6.6 to 9.0) and soils classified as strongly saline 
(greater than 16 dS/m).  Winter hardiness and frost 
tolerance are good, though variable among seed lots, and 
it is moderately shade tolerant.  
 
‘Shoshone’ manystem wildrye has been widely 
introduced throughout the western US, but its exact 
distribution is currently unknown.  For updated 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS web site. 
 
Establishment 
Fall dormant plantings are recommended for northern 
regions to overcome seed dormancy.  Spring-planted seed 
must be mechanically scarified to break seed coat 
imposed dormancy.  Seedlings have poor vigor, develop 
slowly, and compete poorly with weeds and other forage 
grasses in the first year of establishment.  It is thus very 
important to minimize weed competition with properly 
prepared seedbeds and weed management prior to 
seeding.  For range and pasture seedings, seeds should be 
drilled into a well-disked seedbed in late fall just prior to 
freeze up at a depth of 0 to ¼ inch and a rate of 6 to 9 
pure live seed (PLS) lbs/acre (for full-rate, monotypic 
seedings).  Alternately seeds can be broadcast at a rate of 
10 to 20 PLS lbs/acre.  
 
Vegetative planting of rhizomes (‘sprigging’) in mid-
September to November is recommended for 
establishment on sites typically saturated or under 
standing water in the spring or early summer, or where 
rapid cover is needed.  Stand establishment from sprigs is 

 

Prepared By  
Anna Young-Mathews 
USDA-NRCS Plant Materials Center 
Lockeford, California 
 
Susan R. Winslow 
USDA-NRCS Plant Materials Center 
Bridger, Montana 
 
Citation 
Young-Mathews, A. and S. R. Winslow. 2010. Plant fact 
sheet for manystem wildrye (Leymus multicaulis). USDA-
Natural Resources Conservation Service, Plant Materials 
Center. Lockeford, CA, 95237. 

Published:  October 2010 
 
Edited: [17Aug2010 aym, 18Aug2010 kdl, 19Aug2010 
cjs, 20Aug2010 msk, 31Aug2010 jds, 1Sep2010 srw] 
 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov

slow during the first year, but once established rhizomes 
spread rapidly to produce better coverage and more forage 
than stands originating from seed.  In Montana, sprigging 
at a rate of 40 bu/acre is recommended for streambank 
protection plantings.      
 
Management 
Once established, stands of manystem wildrye survive for 
many years.  Manystem wildrye has been found to be 
compatible with many other species because it does not 
form a dense, restrictive sod.  It is highly productive for 
hay when planted at a rate of 6 PLS lbs/acre on irrigated 
or subirrigated sites.  Best yields are attained on fields 
with adequate levels of fertility, especially available 
nitrogen.  High concentrations of salts and/or low levels 
of moisture result in poorer stand establishment, lower 
forage yields and slower growth rates.  Forage trials 
conducted on Shoshone manystem wildrye over a 4-year 
period, on fields with moderate fertility, yielded an 
average of 1,750 lbs/acre in Bridger, MT.   
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Manystem wildrye is susceptible to “take-all” disease, 
caused by the root-inhabiting fungus Ophiobolus 
graminis.  A temporary solution to arrest the disease may 
be achieved with an application of P2O5 at a rate of 
100 
lbs/acre.  More drastic follow-up measures to renovate the 
site include plowing to a 6-inch depth, harrowing, and 
irrigating to promote rhizome emergence.  Manystem 
wildrye varies in resistance to leaf rust, stripe rust, and 
ergot.  No ill effects are known from livestock 
consumption of the infected material.  
 
Environmental Concerns 
Manystem wildrye is known to produce fertile hybrids 
with beardless wildrye (Leymus triticoides).  Seed 
production in these species is poor so hybrid offspring 
should not have a competitive advantage in native plant 
communities.   
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
‘Shoshone’ was released in 1980 as beardless wildrye 
(Leymus triticoides) through a cooperative agreement 
between the Bridger PMC and the agricultural experiment 
stations of Montana and Wyoming.  After its release, 
however, Shoshone was determined to be Leymus 
multicaulis.  The original collection was made in 1958 
from the Riverton, WY fairgrounds, possibly from a 
seeded stand established in the 1940s from an unknown 
source.  Shoshone is adapted to a wide range of soil 
textures on sub-irrigated sites in most areas of Montana 
and Wyoming, as well as northwestern Colorado and 
southern Idaho.  It is a cool-season, moderately tight sod-
forming cultivar selected primarily for forage, 
stabilization, or cover on wet or moist-saline-alkaline 
soils.   

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

