AMERICAN FLY 
HONEYSUCKLE 
Lonicera canadensis  
 Bartram ex Marsh 
Plant Symbol = LOCA7 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS Cape May Plant Materials 
Center and Columbus Service Center, New Jersey  

 

William B. Skaradek, USDA NRCS 
 
Alternate Names 
Canadian fly honeysuckle, Fly honeysuckle, Xylosteon 
ciliatum 
 
Uses 
Current uses are primarily for the restoration of natural 
areas on National Park Service lands. American fly 
honeysuckle is a valuable pollinator support species, and 
should be incorporated in seeding mixtures for wildlife 
habitat and plant community diversification.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description and Adaptation 
American fly honeysuckle is a native perennial shrub that 
grows to about 2 meters (7.5 ft.) in height.  It is loosely 
branched with slender twigs and spreads slowly.  From 
April-July it flowers with yellow and whitish blooms; 
fruiting in July-Aug.  It occurs in native woodlands and is 

 
 

 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

readily located in many diverse eco-tones which include; 
rock outcrops, droughty gravels/rocky soils as well as 
marginal lowlands where soil is more moist and fertile.  
Fly honeysuckle seems to tolerate full sun to partially 
shaded sites. 
 
Establishment 
American fly honeysuckle roots readily from cuttings and 
is successfully propagated from seed.  Plant materials 
were out-planted from nursery 1-quart and 1-gallon pots 
for plant community restoration.  Plants from both sizes 
exhibited a high level of survival when out-planted in the 
spring and late spring months, and when standard 
guidelines for shrub plantings were followed. 
 
Management 
During the year of establishment, as with most shrubs, 
ensure adequate water is made available to the planting 
site.  Also protect from mowers and traffic during the first 
year. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
This native shrub does not seem to exhibit any major 
damage from pests, disease or browse. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
Not  known  to  be  invasive.    Consult  PLANTS  database 
since  this  shrub  has  been  listed  as  extirpated  and 
endangered in several states. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin): 
Currently commercial availability of American fly 
honeysuckle is very limited and commercial cultivars are 
not known. 
 
Prepared By:  
William B. Skaradek  
USDA NRCS Columbus Service Center, Columbus, NJ 
Christopher Miller  
USDA NRCS Cape May Plant Materials Center, Cape 
May, NJ 
 
Species Coordinator:  
William B. Skaradek 
USDA NRCS Columbus Service Center, Columbus, NJ 

Published:  November 2009 

Edited: 09Sep07jfh 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 

District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

