OSAGE ORANGE 
Maclura pomifera (Rafin.)       

C.K. Schneider 
Plant Symbol = MAPO 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center 
Manhattan, Kansas 

.  

Figure 1. Fruit and leaf of Osage orange plant from the PLANTS 
Database website. Photo by Jeff McMillian 

Alternate Names 
Hedge apple, horse-apple, hedge, bodark, Bois d’Arc 
yellow wood, mock-orange, and bow-wood. 

Uses 
Osage orange has a long and interesting history of use by 
both Native Americans and early pioneers. Its wood was 
once in demand for making hubs and wheel rims for horse 
drawn wagons, mine support timbers, posts and many 
other uses where decay resistance was important. Osage 
orange was first cultivated in the south in the early 
1800’s. It was brought north by Professor Jonathan 
Turner, a biology teacher at Illinois College, and 
promoted as a living fence by John Wright, editor of The 
Prairie Farmer. By 1847 Turner was convinced that 
Osage orange was the best fencing material available. He 
described it as “horse high, bull strong and pig tight” and 
it functioned as a “hedge” fence long before the invention 
of barbed wire. By the 1850’s Osage orange hedges made 
the fencing of entire farms possible. The French found the 
Osage Indians making bows from the wood and called it 
Bois d’Arc (meaning wood of the bow). Recently, Osage 
orange has been studied for the chemical properties it 
contains that may be of economic importance. Oil 
extracted from the seeds has been tested for its potential 

 
 

 

 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

as biodiesel. The isoflavone pomiferin has been studied 
for its antioxidant activity. Osage orange has also had 
proteolytic enzymes recently discovered in its fruit. 

Status 
Osage orange is a pioneering species forever invading 
exposed mineral soils, particularly over grazed pastures 
and abandoned crop fields. It can be a locally dominant 
tree species in those situations. Please consult the   
PLANTS Web site and your State Department of Natural 
Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., threatened 
or endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland 
indicator values).  

Weediness 
Osage orange has the potential to invade areas abused by 
poor management and the over grazing of pasture and 
range land. This plant may become weedy or invasive 
in some regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed.  Please consult with 
your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension 
Service office, state natural resource, or state agriculture 
department regarding its status and use.  Weed 
information is also available from the PLANTS Web site 
at http://plants.usda.gov.  Please consult the Related Web 
Sites on the Plant Profile for this species for further 
information. 

Description and Adaptation 
 

Figure 2.Osage orange distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS 
Database. 
General: Osage orange belongs to the Moraceae, or 
mulberry family. The name Maclura pomifera comes 
from William Maclure (1763 – 1840) an early American 
geologist; and pomifera which means “fruit-bearing” for 

the large fruits that it produces on the female trees. It is a 
small to medium size tree 36 to 65 feet tall, with deeply 
furrowed bark and thorny branches. The trunk is usually 
short and divides into several prominent limbs with 
upward arching branches. The root system is diffuse and 
covers large areas with its lateral spread. Leaves are 
deciduous, simple, and alternate or are in clusters at the 
end of short spurs. Their shape ranges from broad-ovate 
to ovate-lanceolate, rounded to subcordate  at the base 
broadly cuneate or acuminate at the apex. Leaves are 2 to 
5 inches (in.) long and 0.75 to 2.5 in. wide and have entire 
margins. Leaf blades are dark green, smooth and waxy 
above; paler green with a few hairs beneath. The color 
turns translucent yellow in the fall. Osage orange trees are 
dioecious and wind pollinated with flowers appearing in 
mid-May to June, after leaves. Staminate (male) flowers 
are globular or in short cylindrical clusters, green, hairy, 
with 4 stamens and large yellow anthers, but no petals. 
Pistillate (female) flowers are in dense, globular clusters, 
0.75 to 1.0 in. diameter at the base of a leaf. The fruit or 
“Hedge ball” is produced in September and is a multiple 
fruit consisting of many 1-seeded druplets fused into a 
globose, yellow-green structure approximately 3 to 5 in. 
in diameter. Female trees may start to bear fruit at about 
10 years old. The individual oval shaped seeds are 
imbedded in the fleshy calyx and are 0.3 to 0.5 in. long. 
Seeds are initially cream colored, but will turn brown with 
age and exposure to air. 
For updated distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  

Establishment and Management  
Osage orange is easy to plant and establish from seed. 
Fruit should be collected in the fall and allowed to 
naturally decay for several months. Seeds can be 
extracted from the fruit by maceration in water and 
floating or screening off the pulp. Osage orange averages 
about 200 to 300 seeds per fruit. Cleaned seed per pound 
averages about 14,000. Since Osage orange has a slight 
dormancy problem it may require a short pre-chill to 
initiate germination. A 30 to 45 day stratification at 40 
degrees Fahrenheit (°F) is usually sufficient to break 
dormancy and allow seed germination. 
Seeds extracted from fruit that has fermented over winter 
in a cold state do not need stratification in the spring. 
Seeds may be drilled in rows 8 to 12 in. apart, or in bands 
3 to 4 in. wide. They should be covered with ¼ to ½ in. of 
soil. Fall seeded beds should be mulched while spring 
seeded beds do not need to be mulched.  

Pests and Potential Problems 
In a Nebraska nursery, seedlings have been killed by 
damping off and root rot caused by Pythium ultimum and 

 

Rhizoctonia solani . The most important disease of Osage 
orange is Texas root rot caused by Phymatotrichum 
omnivorum. A six year study of shelterbelt plantings in 
Texas and Oklahoma revealed a 6.8 percent loss of 
seedlings of Osage orange to Texas root rot. A result of 
this study was that Osage orange was not recommended 
for use on any soil type in the root rot belt.  

Environmental Concerns 
Like many woody species Osage orange tends to have an 
invasive nature when exposed to poorly managed range 
and pasture land. It can be found on idle acres and on 
abandoned farm land near hedge row plantings. 

Control 
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use it safely.  Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method.  Trade names 
and control measures appear in this document only to 
provide specific information.  USDA NRCS does not 
guarantee or warranty the products and control methods 
named, and other products may be equally effective. 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
Horticulturally desirable varieties of Osage orange are  
thornless and fruitless. Several male trees have been 
selected and propagated for these specific traits. ‘Wichita’ 
was a selection by John Pair, horticulturist for Kansas 
State University. ‘White Shield’ was an Oklahoma source 
of a fruitless, thornless male clone whose origin was 
along White Shield Creek in western Oklahoma.  

Prepared By:  Richard L. Wynia, USDA-NRCS 
Manhattan Plant Materials Center 

Citation 
Wynia, R. 2011. Plant fact sheet for Osage orange 
(Maclura pomifera). USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Manhattan Plant Materials Center. 
Manhattan, KS  66502 

Published March, 2011 

Edited:  

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 
 
 

 

