HAIRAWN MUHLY  
Muhlenbergia capillaris (Lam.) 

Trin. 

Plant Symbol = MUCA2 

 
Contributed by: USDA, NRCS, Norman A. Berg National 
Plant Materials Center, Beltsville, MD 

 

Pink muhly 
Gulf muhly 
Muhly grass 
 

Photo by Shawn Belt USDA, NRCS, Norman A. Berg National Plant 
Materials Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Purple muhly grass 
Hair grass 
Long-awn hairgrass 
Hairy-awn muhly 
 
Uses 
Conservation: Hairawn muhly is a hardy and drought-
tolerant native ornamental grass that can be used for land 
reclamation.  It is also useful as a fine fuel for understory 
burn management programs. 
 
Landscaping and wildlife: Hairawn muhly produces 
striking pink and purple blooms in the fall.  It requires 
little maintenance and is excellent for meadow gardens 
and as a general garden plant.  Hairawn muhly is known 
to attract beneficial insects such as ladybug beetles 
(Coccinella spp.).  The clumping habit of hairawn muhly 
makes it excellent for use as wildlife cover.  
 

 
 

 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

Status 
Hairawn muhly is listed as an endangered species in 
Connecticut, Indiana, Maryland, and New Jersey; as 
extirpated in Pennsylvania; and as presumed extirpated in 
Ohio.  Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your 
State Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description and Adaptation 
Hairawn muhly is a native, perennial, warm-season grass 
that grows from 1–3 feet tall with a 2–3 foot spread.  The 
stems are un-branched and have an upright habit.  The 
wiry, thin leaves are 18–36 inches long, simple (not made 
up of multiple leaflets), and alternate (progressing singly 
up the stem).  The leaves are green throughout the 
summer and turn copper in the fall.  The purplish-red or 
pink flowers are grouped together in a long, diffuse, airy, 
grouping of flowers which mature from the bottom up.  
The cluster of flowers is arranged on a stem that is about 
18 inches long and 10 inches wide and rises above the 
leaves.  The seed stalks are 2–5 feet tall.  Flowers give 
way to oblong tan or brown seed less than half an inch 
long.  Hairawn muhly clumps but does not spread through 
above or underground stems (stolons or rhizomes). 
 

 

Hairawn Muhly distribution from USDA, NRCS PLANTS database 
 
For updated distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment 
Seeds should be collected from plants in late fall and air-
dried for five to ten days.  Collect seeds during the 
warmest and driest time of day using a comb to avoid 
disturbing the appearance of the plant.  For greenhouse 

 

 

propagation, plant seeds in the winter in order to have full 
plants which are ready for spring planting.  Seeds do not 
need a cold treatment for germination.  If direct-seeded 
outdoors, plant seeds one-eighth of an inch deep in rows 
spaced 24–48 inches apart.  Keep soil moist at all times 
during establishment.  Fertilization is not recommended 
for stands that have been sown directly.   
Propagate by dividing existing clumps in early spring and 
summer.  Do not divide clumps during the flowering 
stage. 
 
Management 
Burn or mow hairawn muhly stands in late winter to 
remove old residue.  Hairawn muhly prefers neutral to 
slightly acidic soils but can tolerate many soil types.  It 
has a low tolerance for high pH soils and a high tolerance 
for salinity.  Hand-weed established stands and fertilize 
according to soil test recommendations.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Aphids are known to infest hairawn muhly blooms during 
the early stages of seed development.  Increasing the 
numbers of beneficial insects such as ladybug beetles may 
be a natural means of biological control. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
No concerns at this time. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
There are no recommended cultivars or selected materials 
at this time.  Hairawn muhly is available from commercial 
nurseries specializing in native plants. 
 
Prepared By:  Samantha Kirk and Shawn Belt, NRCS, 
Norman A. Berg National Plant Materials Center, 
Beltsville, MD 
 
Citation 
Kirk, S. and Belt, S. 2010. Plant Fact Sheet for Hairawn 
Muhly (Muhlenbergia capillaries) USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Norman A. Berg 
National Plant Materials Center, Beltstville, MD 20705 

Published November, 2010 

Edited: 25-Mar-2009 SMK, 4-Apr 2009 RG, 25-Jan-2010 
SVB 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 
 

 

