PURPLE BERGAMOT  

 
Contributed by: Norman A. Berg National Plant Materials 
Center, Beltsville, MD 

Monarda media Willd. 

Plant Symbol = MOME 

 Used with permission of Loghmiller, Campbell & Lynn, The Lady Bird 
Johnson Wildflower Center 
 
Alternate Names 
Purple bee balm and Horsemint 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanical:  
Monarda species were used by a number of Native 
American tribes to cure skin eruptions, reduce fevers and 
treat colds.   
 
Landscaping and wildlife:  
Purple Bergamot is an adaptable, easy to grow wildflower 
for moist, sunny to light shade locations.  It is a moderate 
spreader which will form a substantial colony.  It is a 
native and can be part of a good wildlife seed mixture 
where native grasses and wildflowers are seeded together.  
The common name bee balm resulted from the attraction 
of bees by the fragrance.  Many kinds of bees, butterflies 
(especially Fritillaries) and hummingbirds use the curved 
tubular flowers for nectar.  The seeds are eaten by 
goldfinches and other seed eating birds.  It is deer 
resistant and ideal for rain gardens and other plantings in 
moist areas (such as wood edges).  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 

 
 

 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description and Adaptation 
Purple Bergamot is perennial wildflower that grows 2 – 3 
feet tall.  It is a member of the mint family, and has 
square stems.  The leaves have a strong mint fragrance 
when crushed.  Its leaves are oblong and pointed 
(lanceolate) and placed opposite one another on the stems, 
and the stems are topped by a cluster of reddish purple 
tubular flowers that bloom in summer.  The small leaves 
at the base of each flower (bracts) are also purple or 
purplish.  Purple Bergamot spreads through rhizomes 
(horizontal underground stems that produce new plants).  
Purple Bergamot can be found growing in swampy 
thickets, stream beds and ditches.   
   

 
Purple Bergamot distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database. 
 
For updated distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment 
General: Purple Bergamot can be started by seeds, 
softwood cuttings or by dividing the clumps in the spring.  
Collect seed heads in fall and spread them over a clean, 
dry surface indoors to dry for several days.  Then place 
the seed heads in a paper bag and shake them.  The seeds 
will fall out of the seed heads and into the bag.  Then run 
the seeds and associated chaff through a sieve.  Store the 
seeds in a dry sealed and labeled container or reseal able 
storage bag with wet sand or peat moss at 38 - 40 degrees 
F for 3 months.  
 
Propagation by seeds: Seeds sown in flats during January 
and stored in a greenhouse are expected to germinate in 1 
to 2 weeks.  The soil mix can be 1/3 sand and 2/3 
commercial plug mix.  Apply a starter fertilizer solution 

Prepared By  
Samantha Kirk and Shawn Belt, NRCS, Norman A. Berg 
National Plant Materials Center, Beltsville, MD 
 
Citation 
 
Kirk, S. and Belt, S. 2010.  Plant Fact Sheet for Purple 
Bergamot (Monarda media). USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Norman A. Berg National Plant 
Materials Center, Beltsville, MD 20705. 

Published October, 2010 

Edited: 1-18-10 SMK 5-18-10 SVB, 7-13-2010 JW, 9-26-
11 RJU 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

for the seedlings.  Water flats when the soil surface is dry 
to the touch.  Keep the seedlings in the flats for 6 - 7 
weeks and then transplant them to 3-inch pots.  Pinch off 
the tops of the plants several times during the growing 
season to encourage branching and a bushier grow habit.  
Apply an all-purpose fertilizer for the transplants on a 
weekly basis.  When the roots fill the container (about 2 
months), they are ready for out planting in the garden.   
 
Seedlings should be planted into a sunny, weed-free, well-
drained soil about 1.5 to 2 feet apart.  Water weekly 
during droughty conditions for the first 2 seasons. 
 
Seeds can also be broadcast on a weed-free surface from 
January to mid-May in sunny locations.  Once the seeds 
germinate, seedlings should be watered during extended 
dry periods.  If weeds are a problem during the first 
summer of growth, mow the area 3 to 5 times to a height 
of 4 and 8 inches to reduce weed competition. 
 
Propagation by cuttings: Take 3- to 4-inch long stem tip 
cuttings at any time from May to August.  Remove the 
lower leaves and all flower or seed heads and insert the 
stems into a sand and perlite rooting medium.  Bury each 
cutting up to the first node.  Place the cuttings in an 
enclosed area and mist them several times a day.  In 4 to 5 
weeks the cuttings should be well rooted and can be 
transplanted to pots.  Transplant to the garden in the early 
autumn. 
 
Management 
Purple  Bergamot  prefers  damp,  acidic  soil. 
  Once 
established,  Purple  Bergamot  still  benefits  from  extra 
watering during dry summers.    Mowing in spring after 
woody  plants 
reduce  woody  plant 
encroachment.    Delaying  mowing  until  spring  will  also 
leave seed heads standing for seed eating birds and other 
wildlife.   In a garden plants  will spread quickly through 
rhizomes; plants may be divided every three years. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Purple Bergamot foliage can be infected with powdery 
mildew and rust in humid climates or when the clumps 
become too large and air circulation is reduced.  These 
diseases discolor the foliage and cause the plants to lose 
their leaves prematurately.   This is mainly an aesthetic 
problem and rarely causes long term problems for the 
plant. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
There are no recommended cultivars or selected materials 
at this time.   

leaf  out  will 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

