POWDERPUFF 
Mimosa strigillosa  
Torr. and A. Gray 
Plant Symbol = MIST2 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS East Texas Plant Materials 
Center  

Photo courtesy:USDA/NRCS East Texas Plant Materials 
Center  

 

  

Alternate Names 
Some alternate names include powderpuff, herbaceous 
mimosa and sunshine mimosa. 

Uses 
Powderpuff is utilized by both domestic livestock and 
wildlife. It serves as a food source for cattle, goats sheep 
and deer.  Powderpuff is also an important plant for 
pollinator habitat.  Bees utilize powderpuff as a pollen 
source while little sulphur butterfly caterpillars (Pyristia 
lisa) feed on the foliage. 

Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Description and Adaptation 
Powderpuff is a native, warm season, perennial legume 
which may reach up to eight inches in height. Unlike 
other Mimosa species, powderpuff does not have small 
prickles along its stems. The plant produces seed and 
spreads by stems which root to the ground along their 

 
 

 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

length. The leaves are alternately arranged along the stem 
and are bipinnate. The leaflets are sensitive to contact, 
folding up quickly after being disturbed. The plant 
produces a showy pink bloom about one inch long during 
the spring and summer. The flowers develop into small, 
flattened, oblong seed pods which turn brown when 
mature. 

The plant can be found on various soils, especially sandy 
loam. Preferred areas are prairies, grasslands, meadows, 
forest openings, and roadsides. Powderpuff is found 
throughout the southeastern United States. For updated 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
 

Powderpuff distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database. 

Establishment 
A soil analysis should be conducted prior to planting to 
determine if soil amendments of phosphorus and 
potassium are needed.  The optimum pH range is 6.2 to 
7.1.  Soils with a pH less than 4.1 are unsuitable and must 
be amended to increase pH. 
 
Seedbed preparation should begin in advance of planting. 
Planting can be completed in spring or early fall. Prepare 
a clean, weed free seedbed using tillage or herbicide 
application. Soil amendments maybe added while 
preparing the seed bed to help incorporate them in the 
soil.  Prior to planting, the soil should be firm, not fluffy 
or powdery. Scarify and inoculate seed with strophostyles 
spec 1 inoculant before planting. Mechanically scarifying, 
nicking or roughing the seed coat, results in better 
germination than chemical scarification or heat 
treatments.  Powderpuff, if inoculated, will fix its own 

nitrogen.  Avoid fertilization with nitrogen as it will 
promote weedy pests, and make them more competitive. 
 
If available use a drill type planter to ensure good seed to 
soil contact. Broadcast seeding may be used, however 
additional cultipacking or light dragging should be done 
to cover the seed. Seed should be planted about ¼” deep. 
Crockett germplasm herbaceous mimosa contains 
approximately 30,000 seeds per bulk pound. A seeding 
rate of seven pounds of pure live seed (PLS) per acre is 
recommended. For seed mixes, reduce the seeding rate 
according to the percent desired in the mixture. 
 

Management 
Powderpuff  is  not  an  overly  aggressive  plant  and  other 
plants  will  eventually  come  into  the  stand.  Unwanted 
plants  can  be  controlled  by  mowing.  Glyphosate  can  be 
applied to treat cool season weeds in the winter and early 
spring  when 
is  dormant.. 
However,  powderpuff  may  not  become  dormant  in  the 
most southern portion of its range. 
 

the  herbaceous  mimosa 

Pests and Potential Problems 
The caterpillar of the little sulphur butterfly (Pyristia lisa) 
feeds on powderpuff foliage. 

Environmental Concerns 
None. 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
Crockett germplasm herbaceous mimosa was released in 
2006 by the USDA/NRCS East Texas Plant Materials 
Center, Nacogdoches, Texas. Crockett germplasm 
herbaceous mimosa was collected from Houston County, 
Texas. 

Prepared By: Melinda Brakie, USDA NRCS East Texas 
Plant Materials Center, Nacogdoches, Texas. May 2011 

Citation 
Brakie, M. 2011. Plant fact sheet for powderpuff (Mimosa 
strigillosa). USDA-Natural Resources Conservation 
Service, East Texas Plant Materials Center. Nacogdoches, 
Texas  75964. 

Published May, 2011 

Edited:  

 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

