INDIAN PLUM 

Oemleria cerasiformis (Torr. & A. 
Gray ex Hook. & Arn.) Landon 

Plant Symbol = OECE 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS Corvallis, Oregon Plant 
Materials Center 
 

 

Photo by Pete Gonzalves  
 
Alternate Names  
Oemleria cerasiformis is named for Augustus Gottlieb 
Oemler (1773-1852), a German-American pharmacist and 
naturalist.  Previous scientific names include Nuttallia 
cerasiformis Torr. & A. Gray ex Hook. & Arn. and 
Osmaronia cerasiformis (Torr. & A. Gray ex Hook. & 
Arn.) Greene.  Osoberry is a frequently used common 
name while Oregon plum, Indian peach, and bird cherry 
are also synonyms.  
  
Uses  
Often the first deciduous native shrub to flower in late 
winter, Indian plum is an important early season nectar 
source for hummingbirds, moths and butterflies, native 
bees and other pollinator species.  Indian plum is popular 
for Pacific Northwest restoration projects due to its ease 
of propagation, rapid growth, and wide tolerances for 
various shade and moisture regimes.  The fibrous roots 
resist erosion.  Clones that root more readily can be 
employed in restoration projects as live stakes or as 
rooted cuttings.  With adequate sunlight, it bears 
numerous late winter/early spring flowers from a young 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

age but root sprouting may limit its landscape use to 
larger settings.  Various small mammals plus foxes, 
coyotes, deer, bears, and many bird species consume the 
‘plums’ and disperse the seed.  For livestock, this species 
is considered unpalatable.  Indian plum fruit is edible for 
humans but is often bitter, even when fully ripe.  Native 
Americans ate the fruit fresh, dried, or cooked.  The bark 
was used as a tuberculosis remedy and a mild laxative.  
Strips of bark were used to bind harpoon tips.  
  
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
  
Description  
Indian plum is a fast growing but relatively short-lived 
perennial deciduous shrub or small tree of 6 to 16 feet.  It 
is the only species of its genera and the only member of 
the Prunoid subfamily of Rosaceae that is usually 
dioecious (separate male and female plants) or produces 
more than one fruit per female flower.  Indian plum is 
native and common at lower elevations from extreme 
southwest British Columbia to Oregon’s Willamette 
Valley and surrounding foothills.  Continuing south, it 
becomes less common in the California Coast Ranges to 
Santa Barbara County and western slopes of the Sierra 
Nevada Mountains to Tulare County California.  For 
current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page 
for this species on the PLANTS Web site.    
  
Fragrant 1/2 inch greenish white flowers usually appear 
by late winter in loose hanging clusters of 10 to 20 
flowers each.  Leaves also emerge early taking advantage 
of sunlight before overstory trees produce leaves and 
shade.  Indian plum leaves are alternate, lance-shaped and 
2 to 5 in. long, with smooth edges that are rolled under 
somewhat.  The leaves are pale green, paler below and 
give off a cucumber-like odor when crushed.  They begin 
turning yellow in mid summer.  Twigs are smooth and 
purplish brown with noticeable orange pores (lenticels).  
Partitions inside the pith (center of the stem) create small 
chambers that are visible when the twig is split 
lengthwise.  The bark has a bitter taste.  The 1/2 inch fruit 
of Indian plum, numbering up to 5 per flower, start out 
tan to pale orange, transition through pink to reddish 
purple, then ripens bluish black with a thin waxy coat.  
The seed is a stone, or pit, that contains cyanoglucosides 
(the bitter, toxic compounds also found in almonds).   
 

 
 

 

 

 

specimens.  Older shoots and suckers may be removed or 
limbs pruned back to reduce overall size.  Established 
plants may be cut back to near the crown in winter for 
complete rejuvenation.   
  
Pests and Potential Problems  
Indian plum rarely suffers insect or disease injury but can 
be susceptible to rhododendron lace bug (Stephanitis 
rhododendri) and a conidia producing leaf spot fungus, 
Cylindrosporium nuttallii.  Indian plum may display 
chlorosis (leaf yellowing) on shallow soils overlying 
chalk.  
  
Environmental Concerns  
This plant spreads slowly, mostly by root suckering.  
Although Indian plum seed is dispersed by many birds 
and mammals, it requires a disturbed site in order to 
become established.   
  
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
There are no known cultivars of Indian plum but this 
species is commonly available from western native plant 
nurseries.  
  
Prepared by: Pete Gonzalves and Dale Darris. USDA 
NRCS Plant Materials Center, Corvallis, Oregon. May 
2009.  
  
Species Coordinator: Pete Gonzalves. USDA NRCS 
Plant Materials Center, Corvallis, Oregon 

Published:  May 2009 

Edited: 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

© PROVINCE OF BRITISH COULMBIA 

 
Indian plum occurs primarily below 1000 feet elevation 
but up to 5000 ft. in the southern part of its range.  It is 
often found in moist open forests, clearings, riparian 
areas, along roadsides and fence lines, on hillsides and in 
canyons.  It also occupies drier forests, chaparral and 
coastal scrub habitats. Indian plum grows on most soil 
textures but not on sites that are saturated in winter or 
especially shady.  
  
Establishment  
Indian plum seed is easily gathered by hand-stripping fruit 
in May to July depending on location. Ten pounds of 
fresh fruit will yield approximately 2.5 lb. of seed.  
Macerate the fruit in a blender and rinse the seed over a 
screen to remove the pulp prior to storage under cool (33-
38 degrees F) and dry conditions.  Seeds of Indian plum 
are larger toward the southern extent of its range with 
about 1800 seeds per pound in California versus more 
than 4000 in Washington.  Viability is usually high with 
90+% germination after two to four months of moist 
chilling (stratification).  Bottom heat may aid 
germination, which will occur in about a week.  Although 
Indian plum is usually propagated by seed, dormant 
season digging of root suckers or seedlings, layering, and 
cuttings can also be effective.  Hardwood cuttings of 
vigorous 1-yr old wood collected early in winter and 
treated with rooting hormone often perform well.  Success 
with softwood and semi-hard wood cuttings has also been 
reported.  New plants can be obtained by layering in the 
spring with separation from the parent plants during the 
following dormant season.  
 
Management  
Indian plum is shallow rooted and will benefit from 
occasional irrigation during the first year or two of 
establishment.  For riparian conservation sites, plant 
Indian plum 4-6 feet apart in the overbank or transition 
zones.  Greater spacing is recommended for landscape 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

 

