KNOTGRASS 

 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS James E. “Bud” Smith 
Plant Materials Center, Knox City, Texas 

Paspalum distichum L. 

Plant Symbol = PADI6 

 

Robert H. Mohlenbrock @ USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database/ USDA SCS 
1991. Southern wetland flora: Field office guide to plant species. South 
National Technical Center, Fort Worth. 
 
Alternate Names 
Eternity grass, Fort Thompson grass, ginger grass, joint 
grass, joint paspalum, saltene, salt jointgrass, salt-water 
couch grass, salt-water paspalum, seashore paspalum, and 
turfgrass 
 
Uses 
Wildlife: Knotgrass is grazed by deer and other mammals.  
It provides a substantial source of food for ducks as well.  
Knotgrass also serves as a larval host to the sunrise 
skipper, Adopaeoides prittwitzi.  
 
Livestock:  Knotgrass can provide valuable forage for 
livestock, especially in areas of high salinity.  It can be 
used for hay, but is not suitable for use in silage. 
 
Erosion:  Knotgrass can tolerate a waterlogged 
environment which allows it to be used in the restoration 
of wetlands, marshes, beaches, and stream banks.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS website 
(www.plants.usda.gov) and your State Department of 
Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation 
if not properly managed.  Please consult with your local 
NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service 
office, state natural resource, or state agriculture 
department regarding its status and use.  Weed 
information is also available from the PLANTS website at 
http://plants.usda.gov.  Please consult the Related Web 
Sites on the Plant Profile for this species for further 
information. 
 
Description 
Knotgrass is a warm season, perennial grass that grows in 
clumps or creeping along the soil surface.  New growth 
begins in March and will remain green until the first frost.  
Stems grow along the soil and range from 6-72 inches in 
length.  At each node, roots are sent downward, and 
flowering stems emerge up to 18 inches tall.  Nodes on 
the creeping stems are often pubescent whereas the nodes 
on the mat-forming stems are glabrous.  Blades are flat 
and taper to an enrolled apex.  They are 2-6 inches long 
and about one inch wide.  Flowers from knotgrass range 
in color from usually pink to red, green, or dull white.  
They are about 1/8 inch long and grow in clusters of two 
to three per stem.  Seed have an oval shape with one end 
tapered to a point.  They have a yellowish light color and 
averages about 1/10 inch long. 
 
Adaptation 
Knotgrass is found in both wet and well-drained areas.  
Common locations to find knotgrass are meadows, 
marshes, and ditches, but it can also be found growing in 
cultivated and disturbed areas.  Knotgrass is also adapted 
to areas with high salinity. 
 
 

 
 

 

 

Control 
Knotgrass can become a serious weed in direct-seeded 
rice fields under favorable conditions.  Please contact 
your local agricultural extension specialist or county weed 
specialist to learn what works best in your area and how 
to use it safely.  Always read label and safety instructions 
for each control method.  Trade names and control 
measures appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, and 
other products may be equally effective. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
None  
 
Prepared By: Brandon Carr, USDA NRCS James E. 
“Bud” Smith Plant Materials Center, Knox City, Texas 
 
Citation 
Carr, C. 2010. Plant Fact Sheet for Knotgrass (Paspalum 
distichum). USDA-Natural Resources Conservation 
Service, James E. “Bud” Smith Plant Materials Center. 
Knox City, TX  79529 

Published:  August 2010 

Edited: 30Jul2010 bc,  

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

 
 

 

  

Knotgrass distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database 
 
For updated distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment 
Knotgrass reproduces from rhizomes, stolons, and seeds.  
It can be easily established by sowing stolons in damp 
holes.  It can also be planted directly into water saturated 
sites, which would allow it to remain green throughout the 
year.  Knotgrass may flower throughout the year.  The 
seed may be gathered; however, seed dormancy must 
break before they germinate.  The seed yields the highest 
germination when temperatures are between 82 to 95° F.  
Scarifying seed with acid will also increase germination.  
It is not recommended to mix knotgrass with cool season 
grasses in seed mixtures.  The cool season grasses will 
dominate the warm season grasses that begin growth later 
in the year.   
 
Management 
Knotgrass can be grazed, but it is recommended to lightly 
graze and give 2 ½ to 3 months rest because the stolons 
are easily uprooted.  Consult your local NRCS Field 
Office for assistance with planning and applying 
prescribed grazing.  Tilling knotgrass on dry surfaces will 
increase the number of stolons rooting into the soil and 
encourage a denser sod.  Proper management is needed to 
prevent knotgrass from blocking irrigation ditches and 
other waterways.  Knotgrass will survive burnings as long 
as water is above the soil surface to protect the rhizomes.  
Consult your local NRCS Field Office for assistance with 
planning and applying prescribed burning.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
None Known 
 
Environmental Concerns 
None Known 
 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

