 

 

 
SLENDER CINQUEFOIL 

Potentilla gracilis Douglas ex 

Hook. 

Plant Symbol = POGR9 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials 
Center, Oregon 

© G.D. Carr, 2006 

 

Alternative Names 
Alternate Common Names:  northwest cinquefoil, 
graceful cinquefoil, western cinquefoil, prairie cinquefoil, 
fivefinger cinquefoil, cinquefoil, five-finger, graceful 
five-finger, northwest fivefinger, slender potentilla  
Alternate Scientific Names:  None 

Uses 
Pollinator habitat: Slender cinquefoil serves as a nectar 
and/or pollen source for European honey bees, native 
bees, butterflies, and other beneficial insects.  It is also a 
possible butterfly host plant for the purplish copper 
(Lycaena helloides) and two-banded checkered skipper 
(Pyrgis ruralis).  
Ornamental: Slender cinquefoil is an attractive plant for 
perennial garden borders, wildflower meadows, openings 
in a woodland or wildlife garden, or around a pond.  
Aside from the beautiful early-summer golden blooms, 
plants have attractive seed heads, showy fall foliage that 
turns shades of pink, orange and yellow, and are generally 
deer-resistant.  

  Plant Fact Sheet

Restoration:  Slender cinquefoil is an important 
component of many native meadow and prairie 
ecosystems.  Restoration projects in these habitats should 
consider including this hardy, perennial wildflower in 
seed mixes. 
Ethnobotanic: This plant was used for medicinal purposes 
by tribes of the Pacific Northwest.  The Okanagan-
Colville took an infusion of pounded roots as a tonic for 
the blood, general aches and pains, diarrhea, and 
gonorrhea, or used the infusion to wash sores.  The 
Thompson Indians used a poultice of mashed leaves and 
roots on wounds to draw out the pain. 

Status 
This species is considered a facultative wetland plant in 
California, meaning it usually occurs in wetlands, but it 
can also occur in non-wetlands throughout its native 
range.  Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your 
State Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Description and Adaptation 
Slender cinquefoil, a member of the rose family 
(Rosaceae), is a common, native, tufted perennial 
wildflower that grows from a short, thick rhizome or 
branched woody crown.  Stems are brown-scaly at the 
base and more or less ascending, extensively branched 
upwards, bearing short-woolly to long-spreading hairs, 
and reaching 8 to 40 inches long.  The leaves are gray-
green, oval, 2 ½ to 12 inches wide, divided from a single 
point into 5 to 9 inversely-lance-shaped, sharply toothed 
leaflets.  The underside of the leaves is usually white 
silky-hairy, while the upper surface is green with some 
hairs.  Basal leaves are on long stems that can reach 12 
inches in length.  Flower clusters are loose and consist of 
a few to many golden yellow flowers with five heart-
shaped petals that are 1/8 to 2/3 inch long.  Flowering 
period is June to September.  The fruits are achenes that 
are less than 1/16 inch, more or less smooth, and light 
brown.  Slender cinquefoil is highly variable, with a 
number of ill-defined varieties that sometimes inter-grade 
across their range.   
Slender cinquefoil is common in meadows, grasslands, 
roadsides, subalpine meadows, and open forests to moist 
areas in deserts and arid shrub-steppe regions at 
elevations up to 11,500 ft.  The plants grow well in full 
sun to light shade, moist to fairly dry soil, and have 
moderate saline and calcium carbonate tolerance.  This 
species is widely distributed throughout North America, 
from Alaska south to Baja California and east through the 
northern Great Plains to the Great Lakes Basin and 

Quebec.  For updated distribution, please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 

 

 
Slender cinquefoil distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database. 

Weediness 
A related Eurasian species, sulphur cinquefoil (Potentilla 
recta), is a problematic weed of pastures, rangeland, and 
wildlands throughout much of North America.  Sulphur 
cinquefoil is a noxious weed in British Columbia, 
Colorado, Montana, Nevada, Oregon and Washington.  
Sulphur cinquefoil closely resembles slender cinquefoil 
and can sometimes be found in the same habitats, but 
unlike sulphur cinquefoil, slender cinquefoil rarely forms 
dense patches and is a desirable component of the native 
vegetation.  The two species can be distinguished by the 
styles (<50 per flower, 1.5-2 mm long in P. gracilis; >50 
per flower, thick, ± 1 mm long in P. recta), achenes (light 
brown and smooth in P. gracilis; dark brown with pale 
netlike pattern of veins in P. recta), stem hairs (flattened 
or spreading, but only one length in P. gracilis; long 
spreading hairs at right angle to the stem and very short, 
flattened hairs in P. recta), flower bracts (½ to 2/3 the 
length of the sepals in P. gracilis; length about equal to 
sepals in P. recta), and the basal leaves (more abundant, 
still present at flowering time in P. gracilis; fewer, 
withered or deciduous before flowering in P. recta).  
Weed information is also available from the PLANTS 
Web site at http://plants.usda.gov.  Please consult the 
Related Web Sites on the Plant Profile for this species for 
further information. 
Establishment 
Slender cinquefoil can be easily established by direct 
seeding or transplanting container stock in the fall or 
spring.  Seeds exhibit physiological dormancy and require 
from 30 to 120 days cold-moist stratification (moist 
chilling) or fall sowing to break dormancy, depending on 
the latitude and elevation of the source population.  Seeds 
should be lightly covered, and usually germinate within 
one to two weeks after appropriate stratification.  For 
pollinator habitat or prairie restoration, seed can be 

broadcast or drilled at a single-species seeding rate of 
about 2 pounds per acre, or 0.1 lb/acre or less as part of a 
mix, depending on composition.  There are approximately 
1.2 to 1.7 million seeds per pound, resulting in 28 to 62 
live seeds per square foot for each pound of pure live seed 
sown. 
Management and Seed Production 
Slender cinquefoil requires little maintenance once 
established and will generally persist for 3 to 10 years.  
For seed production fields, seeds are usually started as 
large plugs in the greenhouse during the winter, and 
planted out in the spring on 12-inch within row spacing 
and 18- to 24-inch between row spacing.  Transplants will 
flower and produce seed one year after transplanting.  
Large seed production fields can be direct combined, 
while plants in small fields are generally swathed and 
collected to dry under cover on tarps or in bags.  
Harvested material is threshed with a hammermill, and 
then cleaned with air screen equipment.  Small seed lots 
and hand-collected material can be rubbed to free seeds 
from the pod-like dried sepals, and then cleaned with an 
air column separator.     
Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no known pests or diseases associated with 
slender cinquefoil. 
Environmental Concerns 
None. 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
There are no developed cultivars of slender cinquefoil, 
but both non-certified and certified source identified seed 
is widely available from commercial sources.  Container 
plants are also sometimes available from native plant 
nurseries. 
Prepared By 
Annie Young-Mathews, Conservation Agronomist  
USDA-NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials Center, Oregon  
Citation 
Young-Mathews, A. 2012. Plant fact sheet for slender 
cinquefoil (Potentilla gracilis). USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Corvallis Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, OR. 
Published June 2012 
Edited: 12Jan2012 dcd; 17Jan2012 klp; 17Apr2012 jab   
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

