LEWIS MOCKORANGE  

Philadelphus lewisii Pursh  

Plant symbol = PHLE4  

Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, Oregon 

  
© 1995 Saint Mary's College of California.  Used with permission.  
 
Alternate names  
Gordon’s mockorange or Philadelphus gordonianus is 
now classified as the same species.  There are at least 8 
subspecies and varieties.  Other common names include 
syringa, Indian arrowwood, and wild mockorange. Lewis’ 
mock orange and mock-orange are alternative spellings.  
  
Uses  
Lewis mockorange is useful for streambank stabilization, 
including soil bioengineering practices such as live 
staking and live fascines, restoration of riparian areas and 
moist ravines, and erosion control on hillsides and drier 
rocky slopes.  The species provides good food and cover 
for wildlife. It is moderately important winter browse and 
thermal cover for elk and deer.  Quail and squirrels 
consume the seeds.  The flowers are a source of nectar for 
hummingbirds as well as food for certain butterflies, bees, 
and other pollinators.  Livestock generally make light use 
of this plant and palatability is considered low, with 
exceptions.  Sprouts and new shoots are very palatable. 
Native Americans used the wood for arrow shafts, combs, 
bows, cradles, and other products. Bruised leaves and 
flowers formed a soapy lather.  Lewis mockorange is 
cultivated for ornamental purposes and hedgerows in part 
because of its large, showy, fragrant blooms.  
  
Description  
Lewis mockorange is an erect to spreading deciduous 
shrub in the Hydrangea family that grows 4 to 12 ft (1.2-
3.6 m) tall and 3 to 9 ft (1.0-2.7 m) wide.  The leaves are 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

oblong to broadly lance shaped, opposite, simple, and 1 to 
3 in. (2.5-8 cm) long with smooth to sparsely toothed 
margins. This species blooms from May to July 
depending on location. The scented flowers are white 
with four petals, solitary or born terminally in clusters of 
3 to 15, and 1 to 1.5 in. (2-4 cm) wide. The fruit is a 
small, light brown, 4-celled capsule and the bark is light 
brown-grey and shredded or scaly.   
  
Status  
Please consult the Plants Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status, such as state noxious and wetland indicator values.  
  
Adaptation  
Lewis mockorange does best in full sun to moderate 
shade on moist, well drained soils that are coarse to 
medium (rich, loamy) textured. While preferring open 
woods and stream sides, it can also be found on 
moderately dry rocky slopes and bluffs. Its soil pH range 
is 5.4 to 8.0 and its annual precipitation range is 14 to 69 
in. (36-175 cm). Eastern and northern exposures are 
favored by this species.  Classified as fire resistant, it will 
resprout from root crowns after burning and regenerate 
from the seed bank that builds up in the soil.   
  
Distribution-Lewis mockorange occurs naturally from 
southern British Columbia south to northern California 
and east to Alberta and western Montana. The elevation 
range is sea-level to 8000 ft (2400 m) in the mountains.  
Habitat includes riparian zones, wooded ravines, forest 
edges, dry hillsides, chaparral, and fir and pine 
communities. For current distribution, please consult the 
Plant profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  

 
 

 

 

Improved cultivars and selected materials (and area of 
origin)  
For restoration and revegetation, the NRCS Plant 
Materials Center in Pullman, WA, released two selected 
class pre-varieties: St. Maries Germplasm (from near Sts. 
Maries, ID) and Colfax Germplasm (from near Colfax, 
WA).  For projects in other regions, material originating 
from the nearest natural population should be favored.  
Ornamental varieties in the landscape nursery trade 
include ‘Cheyenne’, ‘Blizzard’ (winter hardy), ‘Marjorie 
Schmidt’(double flowered), ‘Snow Velvet’, ‘Fallbrook’, 
‘Goose Creek’, 'Mount Tahoma' (variegated), and 
‘Waterton’ among others.   
  
Prepared by  
Dale Darris and Pete Gonzalves, USDA NRCS Plant 
Materials Center, Corvallis, Oregon.  
  
Species coordinator  
Dale Darris, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, Oregon.  

Reprinted with permission, University of WA Press.  

Edited:  

.   

Published:  October, 2009 

Limitations or environmental concerns  
Few insect or disease pest problems have been described, 
but seedlings can be susceptible to damping off. The 
foliage and twigs are edible to ungulates, suggesting a 
degree of safety.  However, the species is listed as 
poisonous to animals and humans by the FDA’s Center 
for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition.  Its seeds are 
poisonous according to some sources, but other plant 
parts may be implicated. The species is generally not 
considered weedy.   
  
Establishment  
Lewis mockorange is readily propagated by seed, stem 
cuttings, layering, root suckers, or division.  Dried 
capsules are collected in late summer and crushed to 
release the seed. The seed should be stored cool and dry 
but germination greatly improves with 2 to 5 months of 
moist cold stratification (prechilling at 1 to 5°C or 33 to 
41°F) to overcome dormancy. Containers, beds for 
bareroot plant production, and weed free, well drained 
revegetation sites may be sown in the fall (untreated seed) 
or spring (treated seed) and the seed lightly covered. The 
species may be propagated from softwood cuttings taken 
in spring and treated with 1000 ppm of IBA (Indole-
butyric acid). Hardwood cuttings can be similarly treated 
but often root readily without enhancement, allowing for 
direct sticking or live staking on revegetation sites. Mulch 
or irrigation the first summer can greatly improve 
establishment of unrooted cuttings and rooted stock, as 
can weed suppression. Fall planting is usually best. 
Protection from animal browse may be critical.  
  

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

