 

 

 

 

  Plant Fact Sheet

LANCE SELFHEAL 
Prunella vulgaris L. ssp. 

lanceolata (W. Bartram) Hultén 

Plant Symbol = PRVUL2 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials 
Center, Oregon 

 

Photo by Amy Bartow, Corvallis Plant Materials Center, 2010 
Alternative Names 
Alternate Common Names: mountain selfheal, narrowleaf 
selfheal, lanceleaf selfheal, American self-heal, self heal, 
heal-all, all heal 
Alternate Scientific Names:  Prunella vulgaris L. var. 
elongata Benth., Prunella vulgaris L. var. lanceolata (W. 
Bartram) Fernald, Prunella pennsylvanica Willd. var. 
lanceolata W.P.C.Barton, Prunella vulgaris var. calvescens 
Uses 
Ornamental: Lance selfheal can be used as a native 
groundcover or alternative lawn that will generally stay 
green all summer in the Pacific Northwest without 
watering and will flower even when mowed fairly short.  
Plants will form a dense mat with small leaves when 
repeatedly mowed or grazed.  This species is also a 
valuable addition to a wildflower meadow or butterfly 
garden, but can become weedy, so it may not be 
appropriate for small spaces or formal gardens. 
Wildlife and pollinators: Flowers provide nectar and 
pollen to butterflies such as whites (Pierinae), sulfurs 
(Coliadinae), and skippers (Hesperiidae), as well as native 
bees such as bumblebees (Bombus spp.), digger bees 
(Anthophora spp.), small carpenter bees (Ceratina spp.), 
long-horned bees (Eucera spp.), and green sweat bees 
(Agapostemon spp.).  Caterpillars of the gray marvel moth 
(Agriopodes teratophora) sometimes feed on the foliage.  

 

Due to its bitter taste, lance selfheal is not generally eaten 
by herbivorous mammals, but the plants may be 
incidentally eaten by cattle, sheep, or deer along with 
pasture grasses.  Ground-foraging birds sometimes eat the 
nutlets. 
Erosion control: Due to its fibrous, rhizomatous roots and 
spreading growth habit, lance selfheal can be used for 
erosion control along roadsides, streambanks and pond 
edges.  The species also has potential as a perennial cover 
crop to provide habitat for pollinators and other beneficial 
insects in vineyards, orchards, and cane fruit or blueberry 
plantations, but more testing is needed. 
Ethnobotanic/medicinal: This plant was used medicinally 
by many North American tribes, giving rise to the 
common names used today. The Quileute, Quinault, and 
Coast Salish in the Pacific Northwest rubbed the juice 
from the plant on boils to heal them.  The Delaware, 
Mohegan and Iroquois made a drink or body wash of 
plant tops to reduce fevers.  The Nuxalk boiled the entire 
plant to make a weak tea that was taken for the heart.  
Studies have shown that P. vulgaris has antibiotic 
properties, lowers blood pressure, and contains a 
compound (ursolic acid) that is believed to increase 
urination and fight tumors.  It is still used as a medicinal 
herb today, but plants are known to concentrate lead 
compounds and other pollutants, so they should not be 
gathered from roadsides. 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may outcompete, displace, or 
overrun desirable vegetation if not properly managed.  
Prunella vulgaris (no subspecies specified) is listed in 
Weeds of the Northeast and Weeds of the Great Plains.  
Please consult with your local NRCS Field Office, 
Cooperative Extension Service office, state natural 
resource, or state agriculture department regarding its 
status and use.   
Description and Adaptation 
Lance selfheal is a native, fibrous-rooted, herbaceous 
perennial that grows from short rhizomes or an enlarged 
stem-base, reaching 4 to 20 inches tall.  Like other 
members of the mint family (Lamiaceae), it has square 
stems and opposite leaves.  The stems are generally un-
branched, slightly hairy above, and may be solitary or 
clustered.  Leaves are lance-shaped, 0.8 to 2.8 inches 
long, minutely hairy to hairless, with short stalks on lower 

 

leaves, and smooth or slightly toothed margins.  The 
numerous, small (about ½ inch), purple to pink or white 
snapdragon-like flowers have short stalks and are tubular 
in shape, with a large, hooded upper lip and a large, 3-
lobed lower lip that is sometimes fringed.  They are 
arranged in a tight cluster 1 to 2 inches long by about 1 
inch wide at the end of the stem.  Within the cluster, the 
flowers are arranged in whorls of sixes, with each whorl 
above two spreading, pointed, leaf-like bracts.  Flowers 
bloom progressively in the spike from the lower to upper 
end.  Bloom occurs April to September, depending on the 
latitude and elevation.  Each flower produces four 
smooth, egg-shaped, one-seeded nutlets that are retained 
in the persistent calyx.  The nutlets are primarily 
distributed by flowing water, grazing mammals and birds. 
Prunella vulgaris ssp. vulgaris in an introduced species 
from Eurasia.  It is now naturalized throughout much of 
the same range as the North American native ssp. 
lanceolata.  The two can be distinguished by their growth 
form and the shape of the leaves growing along the 
middle of the stems: ssp. lanceolata grows upright or 
reclining on the ground with tips ascending and its mid-
stem leaves are narrower (about 3 times as long as wide), 
while ssp. vulgaris generally lies flat on the ground and 
has wider mid-stem leaves (twice as long as wide). 
Lance selfheal is an early successional species commonly 
found in moist, often disturbed areas including forest 
edges, open woodlands, meadows, pasturelands, 
roadsides, clearings and lawns at elevations below 8000 
ft.  It grows best in full sun to partial shade and moist soil.  
It is native to North America and its distribution is 
circumboreal, including most of the Northern 
Hemisphere.  For updated distribution, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  

 

Lance selfheal distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database. 
Establishment 
Lance selfheal establishes easily from seed, having high 
germination rates at most temperatures, with no 
pretreatment necessary.  There are about 756,000 seeds 
per pound.  The recommended single-species seeding rate 
for pollinator enhancement plantings is 2 to 4 lbs/acre, 

while the recommended rate in a mix for prairie 
restoration is 2 to 8 ounces per acre.  Plants can also be 
propagated by dividing and planting out rhizomes in the 
spring. 
Management 
For seed production, fields are direct sown and the first 
seed harvest occurs in the second year after planting.  A 
small percentage of plants will flower the first year, 
especially if they are fall sown.  Large fields can be direct 
combined, while smaller production fields are generally 
swathed and collected to dry on tarps.  In seed production 
fields, plants usually die after harvest.  In the wild, plants 
are typically short-lived but readily self-sow. 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Information is lacking on pests and diseases associated 
with lance selfheal. 
Environmental Concerns 
Plants can become weedy or invasive and may displace 
other desirable vegetation if not managed.  Plants can 
regenerate from rhizome or shoot fragments, and the seed 
can persist in cultivated soil for at least 5 years. 
Control 
A surface application of lime may help control selfheal 
infestations on pastures with poor soils.  Please contact 
your local agricultural extension specialist or county weed 
specialist to learn what works best in your area and how 
to use it safely.  Always read label and safety instructions 
for each control method.   
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
There are no developed cultivars of lance selfheal, but 
both non-certified and certified source identified seed is 
available from commercial sources.  Container plants are 
also sometimes available from native plant nurseries. 
Prepared By  
Annie Young-Mathews  
USDA-NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials Center, Oregon 
Citation 
Young-Mathews, A. 2012. Plant fact sheet for lance 
selfheal (Prunella vulgaris ssp. lanceolata). USDA-
Natural Resources Conservation Service, Corvallis Plant 
Materials Center, Corvallis, OR. 
Published April 2012 
Edited: 16Dec2011 dcd, 16Dec2011 ab; 19Dec2011 klp; 03Jan2012 jab; 
18Jan2012 gm 
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

