REDSEED PLANTAIN 

Plantago rhodosperma  

 
Contributed by: E. “Kika” de la Garza Plant Materials 
Center, Kingsville, Texas & South Texas Natives, 
Kingsville, Texas 

Decne. 

Plant Symbol =PLRH 

 

Forrest Smith, South Texas Natives 

Alternate Names 
Tallow weed, Redseed Indianwheat  
    
Uses 
Wildlife: Redseed plantain is a cool season forage 
recommended for upland wildlife plantings and in range 
seeding mixes. The seed is known to be consumed by 
game birds such as bobwhite quail and mourning doves, 
and the foliage is eaten by bobwhite quail, Rio Grande 
wild turkeys, white-tailed deer, and cattle.  Redseed 
plantain has been shown to be an important component in 
the diets of both scaled and bobwhite quail in southwest 
Texas. 
 
Erosion:  Redseed plantain also can be used in many 
types of conservation plantings, such as stream-side 
buffers and filter strips. 
 

 
 

 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description and Adaptation 
Redseed plantain is a cool season, annual with a slender 
taproot.  Leaves are oblanceolate to 35 cm. long and 5 cm. 
wide, but usually much smaller.  The leaves are grayish-
green in color, pubescent, with margins that are entire to 
coarsely pectinate or salient-dentate.   
 
The scapes (inflorescences) are one to several, hirsute, 
and shorter  than to exceeding the leaves in height.  The 
spikes are up to 2 dm. long and 1 cm. thick.  Each flower 
produces two seeds that are bright red to reddish black in 
color.  The seeds are 2-3 mm. long, more than half as 
wide, nearly flat on both sides, and have a thin pale 
margin.  STN-496 Germplasm contains 322,000 seeds per 
pound.  
 
Distribution:  
Please consult the Plant Profile page for this species on 
the PLANTS Web site. 

Forrest Smith, South Texas Natives 

  

Establishment 
Plantains are established from seed.  Germination tests 
conducted by the South Texas Natives Project (2006) 
found germination rates ranging from a low of 40% to a 
high of 80% and rapid initiation of germination following 
the onset of favorable conditions (germination < 36 
hours).  Plantains typically take 180 days from planting to 
seed maturity.  

For direct seeding, broadcast or drill seed during 
September through December into a clean, weed free 
seedbed.  Seeds should be covered from ¼ to ½” depth to 
ensure good soil to seed contact.  The full seeding rate for 
redseed plantain is 10 PLS pounds per acre for a pure 
stand. When planting this as a component of a seed 

mixture, the seeding rate should be adjusted to the desired 
percent of the mix. 

 

 

Forrest Smith, South Texas Natives 

F and less than 50% humidity. 

 
Management 
Redseed plantain requires little management.  Seed 
production plots will require occasional weeding.  It can 
survive in both droughty and moist conditions.  For seed 
production purposes, occasional irrigation during 
extremely droughty periods may help seed fertility.   
 
Redseed plantain can be harvested with a combine.  When 
harvesting redseed plantain, run the combine’s cylinder 
speed at 1100 RPM, the concave at 6 mm, the sieve open 
3/8", and the fan at 600 rpm. To clean the seed, it should 
first be run through a Westrup brush machine and can 
then be cleaned further using a clipper style seed cleaner. 
It is recommended that after cleaning, the seed should be 
stored at 45o
 
Seed harvested from seed increase plots of STN-496 
Germplasm at Kingsville in June 2008 had 88% viability, 
12% dormancy, 79% active germination, and 87.43% 
pure live seed. Seed yield from Kingsville plantings was 
400 lbs. pure live seed per acre.  Seed harvested from 
Beeville plots in May 2007 had 98% viability, 45% 
dormancy, 53% active germination, and 89% pure live 
seed. Seed yield in Beeville was 387 lbs. pure live seed 
per acre. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Thrips have been observed in the seed heads, however 
they are fairly easy to control with organophosphate 
(e.g.Malathion) and carbamate (e.g. Sevin) insecticides.  
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county pest specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use it safely.  Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method.  Trade names 
and control measures appear in this document only to 

provide specific information.  USDA NRCS does not 
guarantee or warranty the products and control methods 
named, and other products may be equally effective. 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials  
STN-496 Germplasm is a selected class release developed 
from seed originating from Bexar County, Texas.  It was 
released cooperatively between the South Texas Natives 
Project, Texas AgriLife Research-Beeville, and the E. 
Kika de la Garza Plant Materials Center in 2009.  STN-
496 Germplasm will be marketed as part of a blend of 2 
accessions of Plantago called Divot Tallow Weed Blend.  
STN-496 Germplasm was selected for excellent observed 
forage characteristics, ease of mechanical harvest and 
agronomic production, good active seed germination to 
dormancy ratio, and extremely high seed yields in 
comparison to other South Texas collected accessions.  It 
is intended to provide food for wildlife.  Certified seed is 
available and Breeder Seed will be maintained by South 
Texas Natives, Kingsville, Texas. 
 
Prepared By and Species Coordinator: 
John Lloyd-Reilley & Shelly D. Maher, USDA NRCS, E. 
“Kika” de la Garza Plant Materials Center, Kingsville, 
Texas 
 
Forrest S. Smith, South Texas Natives, Caesar Kleberg 
Wildlife Research Institute, 
Texas A&M University-Kingsville, Kingsville, Texas 

Published:  November, 2009 

Edited:  

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 
 
 
 

 

