 

 

 

 
SHORTSPUR SEABLUSH 
Plectritis congesta (Lindl.) DC. 

Plant Symbol = PLCO4 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials 
Center, Oregon 

Photo by Amy Bartow, NRCS Plant Materials Center, 1999 

 

Alternative Names 
Alternate Common Names: sea blush, rosy plectritis, pink 
plectritis, short-spurred plectritis, showy plectritis 
Alternate Scientific Names: There are two subspecies of 
P. congesta, ssp. congesta and ssp. brachystemon.  A 
synonym for P. congesta ssp. congesta is Valerianella 
congesta Lindl.  Synonyms for P. congesta (Lindl.) A. 
DC. ssp. brachystemon (Fisch. & C. A. Mey.) Morey 
include Plectritis congesta (Lindl.) A. DC. ssp. nitida (A. 
Heller) Morey, Plectritis brachystemon Fisch. & C. A. 
Mey., Plectritis anomala (A. Gray) Suksd., Plectritis 
aphanoptera (A. Gray) Suksd., Plectritis anomala var. 
gibbosa (Suksd.) Dyal, Plectritis congesta var. major 
(Fisch. & C. A. Mey.) Dyal, Plectritis magna (Greene) 
Suksd. var. magna, Plectritis magna var. nitida (A. 
Heller) Dyal., and Plectritis samolifolia (DC.) Hoeck.  

Uses 
Ornamental: This annual wildflower makes a pretty 
addition to a wildflower meadow, stony bank, parking 
area or rock garden.  Established populations will 
generally reseed themselves and plants are hardy in 
USDA Zones 6a to 9b. 
Pollinator Habitat: Flowers provide a spring nectar 
source for bumble bees and other native bees, as well as 
butterflies including the endangered Fender’s blue 
(Plebejus icarioides fenderi) and the rare Taylor’s 
checkerspot (Euphydryas editha taylori).  

  Plant Fact Sheet

Restoration:  This plant may be used as part of a seed mix 
for meadow revegetation projects or wildlife enhancement 
and pollinator plantings throughout its native range. 

Status 
This plant usually occurs in non-wetlands, but is 
occasionally found in wetlands.  Please consult the 
PLANTS Web site and your State Department of Natural 
Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., threatened 
or endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland 
indicator values). 

Description and Adaptation 
Shortspur seablush is a native, annual wildflower that can 
paint entire hillsides pink in the spring.  It is a member of 
the valerian family (Valerianaceae).  The stems are 
usually unbranched, slender, upright, angled, and hairless, 
reaching 4 to 24 inches tall.  The basal leaves are early 
deciduous, while the more persistent stem leaves are 
opposite, smooth-margined or slightly toothed, hairless, 
and 3/8 to 2½ inches long by 1/8 to 7/8 inch wide.  Lower 
leaves have short stalks and are spatula to egg-shaped 
with the wider end near the tip, while upper leaves have 
no stalk, are oblong to elliptic in shape, and often 
clasping.  The small, bright pink to white flowers grow in 
densely crowded, more or less headlike clusters at the 
stem tips.  Individual flowers have five petals that are 
fused into a 2-lipped tube less than 3/8 inch long with a 
spur that often has a wider, rounded tip.  Flowering period 
is from March to June.  The fruits are achenes and are 
one-seeded, keeled, and sometimes winged.   

Shortspur seablush distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database. 

 

This plant prefers open to partly shaded meadows and 
slopes that are moist in the spring, but also grows along 
coastal bluffs, rocky balds, and roadsides in spring-moist 
areas or seeps.  This species is found mostly west of the 

 

Cascades from southwestern British Columbia through 
California at elevations below 6300 ft, and along the 
Columbia River Gorge at elevations of 100 to 2400 ft.  
For updated distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 

production, fields are generally direct sown in the fall.  
Larger fields can be swathed and the material collected to 
dry on tarps, while small fields are sown into weed fabric 
so the seed can be vacuumed off the fabric when it 
shatters. 

 

Establishment 
Establishment is easiest by directly seeding into the site in 
the fall or early spring.  Seed lacks dormancy so does not 
require pre-treatment, and can be broadcast on the soil 
surface at a rate of 2 pounds per acre and pressed in with 
a roller or harrow.  Best germination occurs at cool 
temperatures after fall rains begin, usually within one to 
two weeks.  There are approximately 1.3 million seeds 
per pound, resulting in about 30 live seeds per square foot 
for each pound of pure live seed that is planted.  Plants 
can also be started as plugs in a greenhouse set at 
moderate temperatures (70°F days/50°F nights).  The 
plugs should be planted out in the early spring at a 
spacing of 3 to 9 inches. 

Management and Seed Production 
This plant requires little management once established as 
long as it has sufficient sunlight and moist soil in the 
spring.  Established populations will generally reseed 
themselves when open ground is available.  For seed  

Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no serious pests or disease problems associated 
with this plant under garden or wild conditions, but aphids 
can be problematic in greenhouse settings. 

Environmental Concerns 
There are no known environmental concerns associated 
with shortspur seablush. 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
There are no improved materials, but seed of local 
ecotypes is sometimes available from commercial 
sources. 

Photo by Kathy Pendergrass, Oregon NRCS, 2007 

 

Prepared By 
Annie Young-Mathews, Conservation Agronomist  
USDA-NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials Center, Oregon  
Citation 
Young-Mathews, A. 2012. Plant fact sheet for shortspur 
seablush (Plectritis congesta). USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Plant Materials Center, Corvallis, 
OR. 
Published October 2012 
Edited: 09Jan2012 klp; 12Jan2012 dcd; 17Apr2012 jab; 27Apr2012 dhg   
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

Reprinted with permission of University of Washington Press. 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

