BAHIAGRASS 

Paspalum notatum Flüggé 

Plant Symbol = PANO2 

 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center 
Golden Meadow, Louisiana 
 

Johanna Pate  
USDA NRCS Alexandria, Louisiana 
 
Alternate Names 
bahia grass, bahia,  
 
Uses 
Erosion control: Bahiagrass is used for the NRCS 
conservation practices Grassed Waterway and Critical 
Area Planting.  It is planted on critical areas such pond 
banks, levees, and gullies in agricultural fields.  

Turf: This grass is suitable for low-maintenance lawns 
and public areas, and is recommended for infertile soils 
and heavy traffic areas.  It is more shade tolerant than 
bermudagrass.   

 

 

Livestock: Bahiagrass, with proper management, provides 
fair to good pasture and hay, and can be used in woodland 
pasture systems (silvopasture).  Forage quality depends on 
soil fertility and grass stage of growth.  Bahiagrass hay is 
leafy, but difficult to make because of bahiagrass’ 
prostrate growth habit. 
 
Caution: Seed heads of the cultivar ‘Argentine’ are often 
infected by ergot (Claviceps paspali).  Pregnant mares can 
experience abortion problems if they eat large quantities 
of infected seed heads.  Also, ingestion of infected seeds 
can produce toxic effects in cattle.  The occurrence of 
toxic seed heads can be managed through mowing or by 
keeping pregnant horses confined. 
 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

Wildlife: Bahiagrass can be grown with other species that 
are more beneficial for wildlife.  Deer, birds and small 
mammals will utilize the plant—especially the seeds—for 
food. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness  
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation 
if not properly managed.  Please consult with your local 
NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service 
office, or state natural resource or agriculture department 
regarding its status and use.  Weed information is also 
available from the PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov.  
Please consult the Related Web Sites on this species’ 
Plant Profile for further information. 
 
Description and Adaptation 
Bahiagrass is a deep-rooted perennial adapted to a wide 
range of soils.  It is low-growing and spreads with stolons 
and stout, scaly rhizomes.  Stolons are pressed firmly to 
the ground, have short internodes, and root freely from 
the nodes forming a dense sod.  Bahiagrass is a prolific 
seed-producing plant.  The flat, tough-textured leaves are 
usually hairless; with blades 1/8-1/4 inch wide and 8-20 
inches in length.  Leaves are flat, folded, and in-rolled, 
tapering to a fine point.  Stems usually reach 8-30 inches 
tall.  The seed head usually consists of a dual racemes 
with each attached to the top of a slender stem.  
Occasionally there may be a third seed head present 
below the terminal ones.  
 
Bahiagrass is most productive on sandy soils with a pH of 
5.5 to 6.5.  It is more productive on drought prone, sandy 
soils with relative low fertility than other forages.  
 
Distribution: Bahiagrass is a native to South America.  Its 
current range in Central and South America extends from 
Mexico to northern Argentina and the West Indies.  It was 
introduced to the southeastern United States primarily for 
forage, and erosion control and has since become 
naturalized.  It is adapted from east Texas to the Carolinas 
to as far north as northern Arkansas.  Please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 

 
 

 

Establishment 
Bahiagrass can be established from seed or sod.  It will 
grow on soils too poorly-drained for bermudagrass.  The 
best time to establish bahiagrass is during the spring or 
early summer months when adequate moisture is 
available.  Later plantings in the summer have severe 
competition from weeds.  Fall plantings may be used in 
southern areas where cold temperatures are not a problem.  
Proper site preparation before planting is critical to ensure 
successful establishment.  Bahiagrass should not be 
planted on high-pH soils (> 6.5).  For pasture or hay, drill 
15 pounds pure live seed (PLS) per acre at 1/4 inch depth 
or less.  For turf, use 5-10 pounds PLS per 1000 square 
feet.  Good seed to soil contact is essential for bahiagrass 
to germinate.  Bahiagrass seed is slow to germinate and 
may take several months to fully establish.  Grazing is not 
recommended during establishment because seedlings 
will be trampled and damaged.  Crabgrass (Digitaria spp.) 
may become a problem on newly seeded fields.  Mowing 
may be necessary to prevent the crabgrass from shading 
the bahiagrass seedlings. 
 
Management 
Bahiagrass is a relatively low maintenance grass with 
fewer disease and insect problems than some of the other 
introduced warm season grasses.  Its ability to survive 
periods of drought makes it adaptable for southern 
pastures.  Bahiagrass will persist in pastures with a low 
level of management.  Though it responds to fertilizer 
applications, it does not respond to the high rates 
commonly used on improved bermudagrass.  Bahiagrass 
is well adapted to sandy soils due to its tolerance of 
drought and low soil fertility.  Bahiagrass forage is 
slightly lower in quality than bermudagrass.  Close 
grazing stimulates new growth and improves forage 
quality. 
 
The dense, compact sod of bahiagrass inhibits the growth 
of intercropped legumes.  However, white clover 
(Trifolium repens) and winter annuals such as crimson 
clover (T. incarnatum) and arrowleaf clover (T. 
vesiculosum
pastures and hayfields.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
 spp.) have been known to 
Mole crickets (Scapteriscus
cause problems in established stands. The only serious 
disease of bahiagrass is dollar spot fungus (Sclerotinia 
homoeocarpa F.T. Benn). 
 
Environmental Concerns 
Bahiagrass can become a pest in bermudagrass hay fields 
and home lawns.  Use caution when moving livestock that 
have grazed bahiagrass pastures.  Undigested seeds can be 
transported and deposited in other fields. 
 
Control  
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 

) can be established and grown in bahiagrass 

 

 

area and how to use it safely.  Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
Common bahiagrass is a coarse-textured, light-colored 
bahiagrass.  It has an open and sparse growth habit and is 
very susceptible to cold temperatures.  
 
‘Argentine’ bahiagrass forms a relatively dense sod and 
has a dark green color, making it acceptable for lawn use.  
It has good insect and disease resistance.  ‘Argentine’ 
winterkills more readily than ‘Pensacola’.   
 
‘Pensacola’ bahiagrass was released in 1944 by the 
Georgia Soil Conservation Service and the Florida 
Agriculture Experiment Station (AES).  It is the most 
widely grown variety of bahiagrass.  It has an extensive 
root system giving it excellent drought tolerance.  It is 
tolerant to hot or cold temperatures.  It produces an 
abundance of seed heads which limits its desirability for 
use as a lawn grass. 
 
‘Paraguay’ is a short, course, narrow-leaved cultivar that 
produces less forage than ‘Pensacola’.  
 
‘Paraguay 22’ is a single selection, non-released variety 
chosen for its improved cold hardiness over the Paraguay 
types. Both types have lower cold hardiness than 
‘Pensacola’.  
 
‘Tifton 9’ was released in 1987 by the University of 
Georgia and USDA-Agriculture Research Service (ARS) 
as an improved selection from the ‘Pensacola’ variety.  It 
was developed for improved forage characteristics.  It has 
more vigorous seedlings, longer leaves, and improved 
digestibility over Pensacola’.   
 
‘TifQuik’ was developed to have quick seed germination 
and reduced hard seed.  The variety also exhibits quick 
growth, excellent seedling vigor, and higher forage yields 
than ‘Tifton 9’.  
 
‘UF-Riata’ was developed for south Florida by the 
University of Florida.  This variety was selected for 
improved cold tolerance over ‘Pensacola’ or ‘Argentine’. 
 
‘Wilmington’ is the most cold-hardy bahiagrass variety 
known.  Released in 1971 by Mississippi AES and NRCS, 
it has narrow leaves of medium size, but is less productive 
than ‘Pensacola’ and ‘Paraguay’. 
 
Prepared By 
Morris Houck, Plant Materials Specialist, Alexandria, 
Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
Morris Houck, Plant Materials Specialist, Alexandria, 
Louisiana 

 

 

Citation 
Houck, M., 2009. Plant fact sheet for bahiagrass 
(Paspalum notatum Flüggé) USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Louisiana State Office, Alexandria, 
Louisiana  71302 

Published:  October 2009 

Edited:  16Sep09 jd, jfh; 16Sep09 mws  

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

