WRIGHT PAVONIA 
Pavonia lasiopetala Scheele 

Plant Symbol = PALA13 

 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS James E. “Bud” Smith 
Plant Materials Center, Knox City, Texas 

 

USDA NRCS 2009 
 
Alternate Names 
Texas Swampmallow, Rose Mallow, Rockrose, Rose 
Pavonia 
 
Uses 
Wildlife:  Wright pavonia provides dense cover for birds 
and small mammals.  The flowers attract many species of 
pollinators as well as hummingbirds.  The foliage is 
browsed by deer and small animals.  The seed provides 
food to many different species of game birds and small 
mammals. 
 
Landscaping & Beautification:  Wright pavonia produces 
a beautiful pink to red flower that adds color to native 
gardens and landscaping. 
 
Livestock:  Wright pavonia is highly palatable to sheep, 
goats, and cattle. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site 
(http://plants.usda.gov) and your State Department of 
Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation 
if not properly managed.  Please consult with your local 

 
 

 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service 
office, state natural resource, or state agriculture 
department regarding its status and use.  Weed 
information is also available from the PLANTS Web site 
at plants.usda.gov.  Please consult the Related Web Sites 
on the Plant Profile for this species for further 
information. 
 
Description 
Wright pavonia is a native, upright, shrubby, perennial, 
warm-season forb that can grow 2-4 feet tall.  The flowers 
are solitary on slender stems with five petals.  They have 
a rose-red to pink color and will bloom from June through 
the fall time of the year.  Its leaves are alternate with 
coarsely toothed or lobed margins.  The leaves grow from 
one to two and a half inches long.  Seed can be easily 
collected from mature flowers. 
 
Adaptation 
Wright pavonia is found in Texas from the Edwards 
plateau south to the Rio Grande Plains and Trans-Pecos 
area.  It is adapted to a wide range of soil types, but 
performs best on sandy to medium textured soils that are 
well-drained. 
 

 

Wright pavonia distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database. 
 
For updated distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment 
Wright pavonia should be planted on a clean, firm 
seedbed.  Planting can be done using either a grass drill or 
broadcast seedling.  When broadcast seeding, additional 
soil disturbance may be necessary to maximize seed-soil 
contact.  Seed is planted ¼ to ½ inch deep at a rate of 7.0 
lbs pure live seed (pls) per acre to establish approximately 

 

 

six seedlings per square foot.  When planting this as a 
component of a seed mixture, the seeding rate should be 
adjusted to the desired percent of the mix.  Soil samples 
should be taken before planting to determine the amount 
of fertilizer needed to bring the fertility level up to a 
medium range. 
 
Management 
Wright pavonia is used as a component in seed mixtures 
for ranges and pastures.  Grazing should not be permitted 
the  first  year  in  order  to  allow  plants  to  establish  strong 
root  systems.    Although  Wright  pavonia  reseeds  itself 
readily, proper management is required to ensure the plant 
is not overgrazed or over utilized by livestock or wildlife.  
Consult your local NRCS Field Office for assistance with 
planning and applying prescribed grazing. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
None Known 
 
Environmental Concerns 
None Known 
 
Control 
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use it safely.  Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method.  Trade names 
and control measures appear in this document only to 
provide specific information.  USDA NRCS does not 
guarantee or warranty the products and control methods 
named, and other products may be equally effective. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
Kerr Germplasm was originally collected by the Soil 
Conservation Service (SCS) San Antonio nursery in the 
early 1960’s.  After the nursery closed, the germplasm 
was moved to Waco, TX and later to the Knox City PMC 
in 1966.  Seed produced at the PMC was used to establish 
a native population at the Texas Parks and Wildlife-Kerr 
wildlife Management Area near Hunt, TX.   
 
Prepared By 
Brandon Carr, USDA NRCS James E. “Bud” Smith Plant 
Materials Center, Knox City, Texas 

Published:  September 2010 

Edited:  

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

 

