RIO GRANDE 
CLAMMYWEED 

Polanisia dodecandra (L.) DC. ssp. 

riograndensis Iltis  
Plant Symbol = PODOR 

 
Contributed by: E. “Kika” de la Garza Plant Materials 
Center, Kingsville, Texas & South Texas Natives, 
Kingsville, Texas  

 

Forrest Smith, South Texas Natives  

Uses  
Wildlife: Rio Grande clammyweed is recommended for 
upland wildlife plantings and in range seeding mixes. 
Clammyweed seed is eaten by game birds such as 
bobwhite quail, scaled quail, mourning doves, white-wing 
doves, and Rio Grande wild turkeys, as well as many non-
game species of birds and mammals. Rio Grande 
clammyweed is also an important nectar plant for many 
species of butterflies and provides habitat to many other 
insects. Clammyweed has no grazing value for livestock 
or wildlife.  Clammyweed is often found in dense stands 
of non-native grasses, and may be useful in efforts to 
diversify these stands for wildlife.   
  
Beautification: Rio Grande clammyweed is an attractive 
nectar plant for butterfly gardens.  However, its leaves 
release a strong, unpleasant odor when crushed, so plants 
should be located away from foot traffic areas.   
  
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
  

 

Plant Fact Sheet

Description and Adaptation  
Rio Grande clammyweed is a native annual forb, endemic 
to southern Texas. It is found in sandy, gravelly 
(sometimes limestone) or alluvial silty soil.  The plants 
are 2-6 dm. tall and sparsely branched or unbranched.  
The leaflets are in groups of 3 with leaves 2-4 cm long, 5-
20 mm wide.  The flowers are pink to rose with petals 5-
16 mm long.  The fruit is a narrow capsule producing 
numerous rounded seeds.  Rio Grande clammyweed has 
an average of 154,500 seeds per pound.   
  
Distribution: Please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site.  
  
Establishment  
Rio Grande clammyweed is an early successional plant. It 
is quick to establish on disturbed soils, grows quickly, and 
provides a favorable environment for other slow to 
germinate native species. In mixed species native 
plantings in south Texas, clammyweed is often the first 
planted species to emerge and flower. Rio Grande 
clammyweed readily re-seeds itself with moderate soil 
disturbance. 

 

Forrest Smith, South Texas Natives  

Seeding trials at Kingsville, Texas have shown good 
establishment from seed in fall (October) and spring 
(April) plantings. Fall plantings should be made at least 2 
months prior to danger of frost so that seed is produced 
before freezing as clammyweed typically requires 45-60 
days from emergence to seed maturity.    
  
For direct seeding, broadcast or drill seed during March 
through May or in September and October into a clean, 
weed free seedbed.  Seeds should be covered from ¼ to 
½” depth to ensure good soil to seed contact.  Plant at a 
seeding rate of 8 PLS (pure live seed) pounds per acre for 

 
 

 

a pure stand.  When planting this as a component of a 
seed mixture, the seeding rate should be adjusted to the 
desired percent of the mix.  

 

Javier Hernandez, South Texas Natives 

 

Rio Grande clammyweed requires little management.  
Seed production plots will require occasional weeding.  It 
can survive in both droughty and moist conditions.  For 
seed production purposes, occasional irrigation during 
extremely droughty periods may help seed fertility.    
  
Rio Grande clammyweed can be harvested with a 
combine.  When harvesting clammyweed, run the 
combine’s cylinder speed at 1100 RPM, the concave at 8 
mm, the sieve open 3/8", and the fan at 200 RPM. To 
clean the seed, simply run combined product through a 
clipper style seed cleaner. It is recommended that after 
cleaning, the seed should be stored at 45oF and less than 
50% humidity.  
  
Spring seed harvests near Monte Alto, Texas have had an 
average of 67% PLS, with 15% seed dormancy.  Seed 
yields from June hand harvests (first crop produced) were 
168 lbs. PLS/acre.   Seed increase harvests in June 2008 
at Kingsville, Texas (first crop produced) showed hand 
harvest seed yields averaging 144 lbs. PLS/acre under 
irrigated conditions.  PLS of these harvests averaged 83%.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems  
Green bugs can cause extensive damage to the plants 
foliage, and weevils have been observed in the seed pods. 
Both pests are fairly easy to control with organophosphate 
(e.g.Malathion) and carbamate (e.g. Sevin) insecticides.  
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county pest specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use it safely.  Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method.  Trade names 
and control measures appear in this document only to 
provide specific information.  USDA NRCS does not 
guarantee or warranty the products and control methods 
named, and other products may be equally effective.  
  

Commercial seed production of Rio Grande clammyweed 
should focus on production of the first seed crop 
following planting. Plants commonly flower and produce 
seed beyond the first seed crop, and will set seed until 
frost; however subsequent seed crops have poor seed fill, 
lower active germination, and significantly lower seed 
yields.  
  
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials   
Zapata Germplasm is a selected class release developed 
from seed originating from Dimmit and Zapata County, 
Texas.  It was released cooperatively between the South 
Texas Natives Project and the E. Kika de la Garza Plant 
Materials Center in 2009.  Zapata Germplasm was 
selected for active seed germination and superior field 
performance in comparison to other South Texas 
collected accessions.  It is intended to provide food for 
wildlife.  Certified seed is available and Breeder Seed will 
be maintained by South Texas Natives, Kingsville, Texas.  
  
Prepared By and Species Coordinator:  
John Lloyd-Reilley & Shelly D. Maher, USDA NRCS, E. 
“Kika” de la Garza Plant Materials Center, Kingsville, 
Texas  
  
Forrest S. Smith, South Texas Natives, Caesar Kleberg 
Wildlife Research Institute,  
Texas A&M University-Kingsville, Kingsville, Texas  
  
Published: November 2009 

Edited:  

For more information about this and other 
plants, please contact your local NRCS field 
office or Conservation District 
<http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or 
the Plant Materials Program Web site 
<http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

