 
 

Plant Fact Sheet

 

Red pine provides cover for many species of mammals 
and birds.  Deer, small mammals and songbirds feed on 
the seed. 

Agroforestry: Pinus resinosa is used in tree strips for 
windbreaks.  They are planted and managed to protect 
livestock, enhance crop production, and control soil 
erosion.  Windbreaks can help communities with harsh 
winter conditions better handle the impact of winter 
storms and reduce home heating costs during the winter 
months and cooling cost in the summer. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Description 
General: Red pine (Pinus resinosa) is a medium sized 
tree, up to twenty-five meters high and seventy-five 
centimeters in diameter (Farar 1995).  The leaves are soft 
and flexible evergreen needles, in clusters of two, slender, 
4”-6” long, dark green borne in dense tufts at the ends of 
branchlets.  The fruit is ovoid-conic, with thin scales, 
becoming light chestnut-brown at maturity.  The bark is 
thick and slightly divided by shallow fissures into broad 
flat ridges covered by thin loose red-brown scales 
(Sargent 1961).  The root system is moderately deep, 
wide spreading, and very wind firm.  
 
Distribution:   
Red pine is native to northeastern United States.  This 
species ranges from Newfoundland and Manitoba, south 
to the mountains of Pennsylvania, west to Minnesota 
(Dirr 1990).  For current distribution, please consult the 
Plant profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.   

Adaptation 
Red pine occurs most often on well drained, dry, highly 
acid, sandy soils of outwash plains, and gravelly ridges 
(Barnes & Wagner 1981).  It is frequently found where 
the soil fertility is low, in pure stands or mixed with 
species such as jack pine, white pine, aspens, oaks, and 
white birch.  This species prefers full sun and is shade 
intolerant and extremely cold tolerant.  Pinus resinosa is 
easily cultivated in nurseries and easily raised in 
plantations (Ibid.).   
 
 

 

RED PINE 

Pinus resinosa Soland. 

Plant Symbol = PIRE 

Contributed by:  USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 

© Joseph O’Brien 

USDA, Forest Service, St. Paul Field Office 

 

Alternate Names 
Norway pine, eastern red pine, pin rouge 

Uses 
Economic: Red pine wood is moderately hard and straight 
grained.  It is grown primarily for the production of wood 
used for poles, lumber, cabin logs, railway ties, post, 
pulpwood, and fuel.  The bark is occasionally used for 
tanning leather (Sargent 1961).   

Ethnobotanic: The inner bark of Pinus resinosa was 
pounded as a poultice for any kind of inflamed wound, 
sore, or ulcer when white pine bark was not available 
(Fielder 1975).   
 
Landscaping & Wildlife: Red pine is an attractive tree that 
is used in recreational areas because of its colorful bark.  

 

 

Establishment 
Propagation by Seed: Cones ripen from August to 
October with natural seed dispersal occurring between 
October and November.  However, seeds can be 
artificially harvested by kiln drying ripe cones for nine 
hours at 130ºF (Dirr & Heuser 1987).  Fresh seed has no 
dormancy and will germinate immediately upon sowing.  
Stored seed requires two months cold stratification.  
Optimum temperature for germination is 77ºF (Ibid.).   

Management 
Most red pine natural stands originate after a forest fire.  
Fire is necessary for regeneration because it prepares a 
seedbed by reducing much of the humus, and competition 
from other trees and shrubs, decreases the number of 
cone-destroying insects, and thins out the overstory 
(Farrar 1995).  Once established, red pine requires little 
care.  Tip and shoot moths sometime attack it.   

& Company, New York, New York. 

Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
Materials are available through nurseries within its range.  
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office for 
more information.  Look in the phone book under ”United 
States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Barnes, B.V. & W.H. Wagner, Jr. 1981.  Michigan 
trees.  The University of Michigan Press, Ann 
 
 
Arbor, Michigan. 
 
Britton, N.L. 1908.  North American trees.  Henry   Holt 
 
 
Dirr, M.A. 1990.  Manual of woody landscape   plants: 
 
 
 
 
Dirr, M.A. 1997  Dirr’s hardy trees and shrubs: an 
 
 
 
Farrar, J.L. 1995.  Trees of the northern United States 
and Canada.  Iowa State University Press,  Ames, 
 
 
Iowa. 
 
Graves, A.H. 1956.  Illustrated guide to trees and 
shrubs.  Harper & Brothers, Publishers, New 
 
 
York, New York. 
 

their identification, ornamental  characteristics, 
culture, propagation, and uses.   
Publishing Co., Champaigne,  

illustrated encyclopedia.  Timber Press,   Portland, 
Oregon. 

4th
Illinois. 

 ed.  Stipes 

ed.  

 ed.  

Iowa State University Press, Ames, Iowa. 

shrubs: hardy in North America.  2nd
Dioscorides Press, Portland, Oregon. 

eastern and central North America.  Houghton 
Mifflin Company, Boston, Massachusetts. 

Grimm, W.C. 1967.  Familiar trees of America.  
Harper & Row, Publishers, New York, New 
 
 
York. 
 
O’Brien, J. 2002.  Images of Northern Forests-red 
pine.  USDA, Forest Service, St. Paul Field 
 
 
Office, St. Paul, Minnesota.  Accessed: 10jan02.  
<http://www.na.fs.fed.us/spfo/for_images/misci
 
 
mage.htm> 
 
Peattie, D.C. 1950.  A natural history of trees of 
 
 
 
Preston, R.J., Jr., 1989.  North American trees.  4th
  
 
 
Rehder, A. 1990.  Manual of cultivated trees and 
 
 
 
Sargent, C.S. 1961.  Manual of the trees of North 
 
 
 
Burns, R. M. & B. H. Honkala, 1990. Silvics of North 
 
 
 
 
Prepared By: 
Lincoln M. Moore 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Species Coordinator 
M. Kat Anderson 
USDA, NRCS, National Plant Data Center, c/o 
Environmental Horticulture Dept., Davis, California 

America.  Vol. 1.  Dover Publications, Inc., New 
York, New York. 

America- Volume 1 Conifers. USDA Forest Service 
Handbook 654. U.S. Government Printing Office, 
Washington, D.C. 

Published June, 2002 
 
Edited: 19jun02 jsp; 29may03 ahv; 060803 jsp 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 
 
 

 

