Plantago hookeriana  
Fisch. & C.A. Mey. 

Plant Symbol = PLHO 

HOOKERS PLANTAIN 

 
Contributed by: E. “Kika” de la Garza Plant Materials 
Center, Kingsville, Texas & South Texas Natives, 
Kingsville, Texas 

Forrest Smith, South Texas Natives 

  

Alternate Names 
Tallow weed, California plantain    
 
Uses 
Wildlife: Hookers plantain is a cool season forage 
recommended for cool season upland wildlife plantings 
and in range seeding mixes. Hookers plantain seed is 
consumed by game birds such as bobwhite quail and 
mourning doves, and the foliage is eaten by bobwhite 
quail, Rio Grande wild turkeys, white-tailed deer, and 
cattle. 
 
Erosion:  Hookers plantain also can be used in many 
types of conservation plantings, such as stream-side 
buffers and filter strips. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

Description and Adaptation 
Hookers plantain is a short-stemmed, cool season annual 
with a slender taproot.  The leaves are linear to narrowly 
oblanceolate, with margins that are entire or with small 
scattered denticulations.  The leaves are up to 3 dm. long 
and 2 cm. wide, but usually much smaller and are 
glabrous to lanate.   
 
The scapes (inflorescences) are erect or ascending, and 
may be shorter than or exceed the leaves in height.  The 
scapes are glabrate to pubescent with spikes to 12 cm. 
long and 8 mm. thick, rarely reduced to only 2 flowers.  
The bracts are broad at the base.  The corolla lobes are up 
to 4 mm. long and whitish with a brown spot at base of 
each or brown stripes the entire length of each.  Each 
flower produces two seeds, dull-brown, finely pitted, and 
about 3 mm. long and 1.3 mm wide.  STN-561 
Germplasm contains 197,816 seeds per pound.   
 
Distribution: Please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment 
Plantains are established from seed.  Seeds should be 
sown directly into the seedbed.  Germination tests 
conducted by the South Texas Natives Project (2006) 
found germination rates ranging from a low of 28% to a 
high of 94% and rapid initiation of germination following 
the onset of favorable conditions (germination < 36 
hours).  Seed dormancy can be as high as 90% but 
appears to be easily broken by field conditions.  Plantains 
typically take 180 days from planting to seed maturity.  

Forrest Smith, South Texas Natives 

For direct seeding, broadcast or drill seed during 
September through December into a clean, weed free 
seedbed.  Seeds should be covered from ¼ to ½” depth to 
ensure good soil to seed contact.  The full seeding rate for 
Hookers plantain is 10 PLS pounds per acre for a pure 
stand.   When planting this as a component of a seed 
mixture, the seeding rate should be adjusted to the desired 
percent of the mix. 
 

 
 

 

 

Center in 2009.  STN-561 Germplasm will be marketed as 
part of a blend of 2 accessions of Plantago called Divot 
Tallow Weed Blend.  STN-561 Germplasm superior 
vigor, seed production, and characteristics making 
mechanical harvest possible.   STN-561 Germplasm was 
selected because of excellent seed establishment 
characteristics, suitability for mechanical harvest and 
agronomic production, and high seed yields in 
comparison to other South Texas collected accessions.  It 
is intended to provide food for wildlife.  Certified seed is 
available and Breeder Seed will be maintained by South 
Texas Natives, Kingsville, Texas. 
 
Prepared By and Species Coordinator: 
John Lloyd-Reilley & Shelly D. Maher, USDA NRCS, E. 
“Kika” de la Garza Plant Materials Center, Kingsville, 
Texas 
 
Forrest S. Smith, South Texas Natives, Caesar Kleberg 
Wildlife Research Institute, 
Texas A&M University-Kingsville, Kingsville, Texas 

Published:  October, 2009 

Edited: [e.g., 08Sep2009 rg, 08Sep2009 jfh; 17Sep2009 
jfe] 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

Forrest Smith, South Texas Natives 

 

F and less than 50% humidity. 

Management 
Hookers plantain requires little management.  Seed 
production plots will require occasional weeding.  It can 
survive in both droughty and moist conditions.  For seed 
production purposes, occasional irrigation during 
extremely droughty periods may help seed fertility.   
 
Hookers plantain can be harvested with a combine.  When 
harvesting Hookers plantain, run the combine’s cylinder 
speed at 1100 RPM, the concave at 6 mm, the sieve open 
3/8", and the fan at 600 rpm. To clean the seed, it should 
first be run through a Westrup brush machine and can 
then be cleaned further using a clipper style seed cleaner. 
It is recommended that after cleaning, the seed should be 
stored at 45o
 
Seed increase plots in 2007 at TAES Beeville yielded 
seed with 93 % viability, 90 % seed dormancy, and 79 % 
pure live seed.  Seed yield was estimated at 288 pounds of 
bulk seed per acre.  Seed harvested from seed increase 
plots of STN-561 Germplasm at Kingsville in June 2008 
had 92% viability, 0% dormancy, 94% active 
germination, and 93.49% pure live seed. Seed yield from 
Kingsville plantings was 322 lbs. pure live seed per acre.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Thrips have been observed in the seed heads, however 
they are fairly easy to control with organophosphate 
(e.g..Malathion) and carbamate (e.g. Sevin) insecticides.  
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county pest specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use it safely.  Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method.  Trade names 
and control measures appear in this document only to 
provide specific information.  USDA NRCS does not 
guarantee or warranty the products and control methods 
named, and other products may be equally effective. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials  
STN-561 Germplasm Hookers plantain is a selected class 
release developed from seed originating from Median 
County, Texas.  It was released cooperatively between the 
South Texas Natives Project, Texas AgriLife Research-
Beeville, and the E. Kika de la Garza Plant Materials 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

 

