CHICKASAW PLUM 
Prunus angustifolia Marsh. 

Plant Symbol = PRAN3 

 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Manhattan Plant Materials 
Center & Kansas State University, Forestry Research 
 

 

Figure 1. Chickasaw plum in full fruit.  
Photo by John M. Row 
 
Alternate Names 
Sand plum, sandhill plum, sand hill plum, mountain 
cherry  
 
Uses 
Native Americans regularly consumed fresh fruits of 
Chickasaw plum or dried them for winter.  First cultivated 
in 1874, the fruit was used for making wine, jam, and 
jelly. Its white flowers are attractive and fragrant in the 
spring, producing a beautiful flower show.  It should be 
part of a native landscape planting.  Chickasaw plum is a 
popular plant for use in developing wildlife habitat on 
sandy soils.  The thorny thicket is valuable for songbird 
and game bird nesting, loafing, and roosting.  Various 
other animals also use it for loafing, bedding, and escape 
cover.  Numerous species of birds and other animals 
consume the fruit.  The plums provide nesting cover for 
northern bobwhites, brown thrashers, northern 
mockingbirds, and gray catbirds in the southeastern U S.  
Northern bobwhites nest in mixed shrub communities 
composed predominantly of Chickasaw plum in Texas. 
Field sparrow, Bell’s vireo, loggerhead shrike, and 
painted bunting also require woody plants including 
Chickasaw plum for nesting.  Plum is important to lesser 
prairie-chickens for resting, escape, and thermal cover.  
Cattle use plum thickets to escape the summer sun and 
actually gain weight faster when the thickets form a 

 
 

 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

usable part of their range.  Chickasaw plum is very 
effective in stabilizing blowing soil.  It may be used in the 
outside row of windbreaks for ground level protection.  It 
is also used to stabilize stream banks and gullies. 
 

 
Chickasaw plum distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database. 
 
For updated distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description and Adaptation 
Chickasaw plum is a short, thickly branched shrub 3 to 10 
feet tall, often forming extensive thickets or colonies due 
to extensive suckering in the western part of its range.  In 
the eastern parts of its range it forms a small tree; height 
at maturity is 14 to 25 feet.  Leaves are simple, lanceolate 
to oblong lanceolate, 0.8 to 2.4 inches long, 0.4 to 0.8 
inches wide, acute or short acuminate, rounded at the 
base, slender, lustrous and glabrous above, strongly 
trough shaped with stalks that bear two red glands near 
the apex with leaf teeth finely serrate, tipped with glands 
or scars of these.  Its numerous zigzag twigs are smooth, 
reddish brown and slender.  Younger branches have 
smooth reddish brown bark with large, horizontal 
lenticels.  Older trees have rough, scaly trunk bark.  There 
are short, side twigs that bear flowers and end in sharp 
points.  Open-pollinated and early blooming, March-
April, the numerous off-white or yellowish-white flowers 
with little fragrance appear before the leaves and are less 
than 1/2 inch across; sepals green, no glands on the calyx 
lobes.  The ripe fruits small, 1/4 to 1/2 inch in size, thin-

 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
Chisholm Germplasm, a Selected Class plant material, 
was released by USDA NRCS, Manhattan Plant Materials 
Center, Manhattan, KS for conservation use; Rainbow 
Germplasm, a native wild plum chiefly P. angustifolia 
derived, released by USDA NRCS, James E. Bud Plant 
Materials Center, Knox City, TX. Pomological varieties 
include Caddo Chief, found in the wild in Caddo Parish, 
LA, and introduced by G. W. Stoner, Shreveport, LA. 
 
Prepared By  
John M. Row, Plant Materials Specialist 
Manhattan Plant Materials Center, Manhattan, KS 66502 
 
Wayne A. Geyer, Professor 
Forestry Division, Kansas State University 
Manhattan, KS 66506 
 
Citation 
Row, J. M. and W. A. Geyer. 2010. Plant Fact Sheet for 
Chickasaw plum (Prunus angustifolia). USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Manhattan Plant 
Materials Center, Manhattan, KS 66502. 

Published: December 2010 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

skinned, red, orange-red, or yellow, not glaucous but with 
a slight bloom; the stone is small, rough, yellowish, and 
turgid, almost spherical; fruiting in June-August.  Some 
trees bear edible fruits; others have very bitter fruits.   
 
Chickasaw plum grows in almost any soil, except strongly 
alkaline.  It occurs naturally on sandy soils, but will 
perform well when planted on heavier clay-loam soils.  
Although partially shade tolerant, it performs best in full 
sun.   
 
Establishment 
One-year-old, bare-root seedlings, 18 to 24 inches tall, are 
used in plantings.  Control of weed and grass competition 
during the first and second years is important in survival, 
early growth, and final establishment of the plants.   
 
Management 
The plums are drought tolerant and require little 
maintenance once established.  Young plants should be 
protected from herbivores such as rabbits, deer, and cattle.  
Protection of older stands during prescribed burns or other 
brush management programs would favor shrub nesting 
birds on grasslands.  Fire can set back the above ground 
growth of Chickasaw plum, but does not kill the plants.  
Protect the thickets from prescribed burning with disk 
strips.  Disk strips stimulate the production of forbs and 
legumes as food sources near the thickets which is 
beneficial to wildlife.  Should fire run through the thicket, 
if it has bare ground, minimal damage occurs, otherwise 
expect 3-5 years of recovery time for the over story 
structure to be recreated.   
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Insects and disease may occasionally attack this species, 
but are not a serious problem in conservation plantings.  
Plum curculio is the primary insect pest of Chickasaw 
plum.  Fruit drop and fruit damage caused by this insect 
must be controlled if commercial plantings of plum are to 
be successful.  Major disease problems include brown rot 
of the fruit and bacterial leaf spot.  Little natural 
resistance to these diseases exist.  Chemical controls for 
the major pests of plum are widely available.  Consult 
your local agricultural extension specialist for 
recommended products and application rates.  Rabbits 
may chew on the bark, but new sprouts will form to 
replace injured stems.  Deer can rub on young trees and 
cause considerable damage.  
 
Environmental Concerns 
None known 
 
 
 
 
 
 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

