BLACK  

CHOKECHERRY  
Prunus virginiana L. var. 

melanocarpa (A. Nelson) Sarg. 

Plant Symbol = PRVIM 

Contributed by: Upper Colorado Environmental   
Plant Center  

 

 

Contributed by: Heather Plumb  
Alternate Names  
Chokecherry, common chokecherry.  
  
Uses  
Black  chokecherry  is  a  valuable  plant  for  providing  not 
just  food,  but  shelter,  cover,  and  nesting  habitat  for 
wildlife.  Its  fruit  is  readily  sought  out  by  bear,  birds, 
rabbits,  rodents,  and  small  mammals.  The  young 
immature  plants  are  desirable  to  deer,  elk,  moose,  bear, 
bighorn sheep, and pronghorn during the spring as well as 
winter months. During the spring months, while in bloom, 
black chokecherry provides an excellent source of nectar 
for many pollinators such as ants, butterflies, honeybees, 
flies,  and  hummingbirds.  Black  chokecherry  is  used  in 
urban  landscaping  enhancement  plantings,  range  and 
mined 
land  reclamation  plantings,  shelterbelts,  and 
windbreaks.  Its  extensive  root  system  is  beneficial  in 
reducing  and  controlling  soil  erosion  in  rangelands  and 
mine land reclamation. In most windbreaks, chokecherry 
is a good shrub to be used in the outside rows.  Its dense 
growth makes it ideal for reducing wind near the ground 
surface.  Native  American  tribes  used  black  chokecherry 
for many medicinal uses. The chokecherry fruit was used 
for canker sores, sore throats, sore eyes, and diarrhea. The 
bark  of  the  plant  was  used  for  diarrhea  as  well.  Roots 
from  chokecherry  were  dried,  chewed,  and  placed  in 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

wounds  to  prevent  further  bleeding.  The  stems  were 
boiled to make a strong tea to treat high fevers.   
  
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status.  
  
Description and Adaptation  
Black  chokecherry  is  a  native  colonizing,  horizontal 
branching, rhizomatous, perennial shrub and/or small tree.  
Its main stem system may be single or may have multiple 
stems  branching  at  the  base.    Twigs  are  slender  with 
prominent  red  to  white  lenticels;  the  bark  is  greenish  at 
first  and  later  becomes  reddish-brown.  As  the  shrub 
matures the bark becomes grey to black. The root system 
consists  of  shallow  rhizomes  which  contribute  to  its 
sprouting  and  rapid  colonization.    Leaves  are  alternate, 
simple,  glabrous  and  elliptic  ranging  from  2  –  4  inches 
long  and  1  -  2  inches  wide  with  serrate  margins.  At  the 
apex of the leaf petiole, two glands 1 – 2 centimeters long 
are  visible.  The  flowers  are  showy  white  aromatic 
racemes  with five petals. The corolla is one-half inch in 
diameter.  Mature  fruit,  approximately  one-third  inch  in 
diameter, are fleshy drupes that are dark red to black and 
possess  an  acidulous  taste.  The  fleshy  outer  layer  of  the 
fruit  is  nontoxic.  However,  poisoning  and  death  have 
occurred  in  children  who  have  consumed  large  amounts 
of  berries  without  removing  the  stones/seed.  The  stone 
possesses  high  levels  of  hydrogen  cyanide  (HCN)  or 
prussic  acid.  Seed  should  be  collected  in  mid-August  to 
mid-September.  
  
Black chokecherry is a large vigorous shrub, with mature 
plants reaching an average height of 12 feet and about 
13.5 feet wide.  Black chokecherry begins flowering in 
May and the fruit is ripe in mid to late August. It can be 
found throughout Canada, south to Georgia, west to New 
Mexico, and California at elevations ranging from 500 – 
10,000 feet. In Colorado it can be found at elevations of 
4500 – 9000 feet. This species can be found along 
streambanks, drainages, gullies, sheltered hill slopes, and 
canyon bottoms. It is well adapted to soil types that range 
from Entisols to Mollisols that have soil textures ranging 
from sandy loams to clays. It can tolerate moderately 
acidic (pH 3.5), moderately basic (pH 7.6) and weakly 
saline soils. However, it cannot tolerate soils that are 
poorly drained or suffer from prolonged flooding periods.  
It is well suited in sites that receive 12 to 30 inches of 
precipitation annually.  
 
 

 

 
 

 

 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
Colorow Germplasm black chokecherry is the only   
release of the sub-species. Seed and plants of Colorow 
Germplasm are available from Upper Colorado 
Environmental Plant Center (UCEPC), Meeker, Colorado.  
  
1
Chief Colorow Ignacio Ouray Walkara (1808 - 1855) 
was a Native American leader of a Ute Timpanogo band. 
The Timpanogo band was also known as the Yampa band, 
their boundaries encompassed the entire Yampa River. He 
had a reputation as a diplomat, horseman, warrior, and 
military leader.  
  
Prepared By:   
Heather R Plumb, Plant Scientist-Range Plants (UCEPC) 
Meeker, Colorado.  
  
Species Coordinator:   
Heather R Plumb  

Citation 
Plumb, H. 2009. Plant fact sheet for black chokecherry 
(Prunus virginiana L. var. melanocarpa (A. Nelson) 
Sarg).. USDA-Natural Resources Conservation Service, 
Upper Colorado Environmental Plant Center, Meeker, CO 
81641. 

Published May, 2009 

Edited:  

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

Establishment  
Black chokecherry can be established with seed planted 
about ¼ of an inch deep in the fall months or with 
container grown plants set in the ground in early spring 
when soil moisture is present. Sprouting does occur. 
Establishment can be slow, especially if soil moisture is 
low. New plantings can require several years (7 to 10) for 
flowering and seed production. Protection from browsing 
and plant competition along with the use of mulch will 
reduce the time required for establishment.  
  
Management   
After seeding or planting live plants, controlling wildlife 
browsing will be important for maintaining vigorous 
growth and fruit production. Reducing plant competition 
is also necessary for rapid plant growth. Once established, 
the plant can withstand moderate to heavy browsing in 
years with average to above average precipitation. 
1
 Germplasm has displayed minor aggressive 
Colorow
behavior because of rhizomatous roots. Some routine 
management may be required to control and maintain this 
plant species in an agronomic, horticultural or home 
landscaping application, but control practices are 
financially feasible and practical.  No specific 
management is anticipated in range or large landscape 
plantings where the species naturally occurs.  
  
Pests and Potential Problems  
The plant can occasionally be a host of ugly nest 
caterpillars. No other serious diseases or pests are known.  
  
Environmental Concerns  
Black  chokecherry  is  an  important  provider  of  food, 
shelter, nesting, and browse for wildlife. However, it has 
been  documented  that  livestock,  primarily  cattle  and 
sheep, are very susceptible to poisoning when grazing on 
black  chokecherry.  Lethal  doses  occur  when  an  animal 
ingests  0.25%  of  their  body  weight  in  an  hour  or  less. 
Black  chokecherry  produces  toxic  levels  of  hydrogen 
cyanide (HCN) or prussic acid in the plant’s bark, leaves, 
stems, and stone/seed pit. HCN is produced enzymatically 
from  cyanogenic  glycosides  when  plant 
is 
fragmented  during  mastication,  rumination,  and  frost 
damage.  Leaves  of  chokecherry  are  especially  toxic  in 
spring  and  summer,  but  poisoning  is  not  likely  to  occur 
then because the chokecherry is not relished by cattle and 
sheep when more palatable forage is abundant.   
  
Black  chokecherry  does  display  minor  aggressive 
behavior  because  of  rhizomatous  roots.  Some  routine 
management may be required to control and maintain this 
plant  species  in  an  agronomic,  horticultural  or  home 
landscaping  application,  but  control  practices  are 
financially 
specific 
management  is  anticipated  in  range  or  large  landscape 
plantings where the species naturally occurs.  
  

feasible  and  practical. 

tissue 

  No 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

