WHIPLASH 

PAPPUSGRASS 

Pappophorum vaginatum Buckley 

Plant Symbol = PAVA2 

 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS E. “Kika” de la Garza 
Plant Materials Center and South Texas Natives 

  
Whiplash Pappusgrass © Forrest Smith, South Texas Natives 
 
Alternate Names 
Pappophorum apertum Munro ex Scribn.  
Pappophorum mucronulatum auct. non Nees  
Pappophorum suffulbosum Arechav. 
 
Uses 
Whiplash pappusgrass is recommended for upland 
wildlife, highway rights-of-ways, and range plantings. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description and Adaptation 
Whiplash pappusgrass is a native, perennial bunchgrass.  
Stems are 30-80 (sometimes 100) cm. tall, stiffly erect or 
somewhat jointed near the base, and smooth. Sheaths 
have a tuft of long hairs on either side of collar, and the 
hairs are deciduous with age. Ligule is a ring of short 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

hairs, but the base of blade immediately above the ligule 
has hairs 2-4 mm long. Leaf blades are flat or curled in 
when dry, 10-20 (sometimes 30) cm. long and 1.5-5 mm. 
broad. Panicles are narrow, tightly contracted, whitish or 
tawny, only rarely with a slight purple tinge, mostly 12-25 
cm. long. Spikelets with 1, rarely 2, perfect florets and 2 
reduced florets above. Chromosome number is reported to 
be 2n=40, or 60 (Reeder and Toolin 1989). Whiplash 
pappusgrass flowers from April through November 
(Gould 1975). Cleaned seed of whiplash pappusgrass 
contains approximately 436,250 seeds per pound. 
 
Whiplash pappusgrass can be found from Texas to 
Arizona and south into Northern Mexico.  It is also found 
in one county in New York and in one county in Maine.   
 
For updated distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment 
Numerous seeding trials have documented good 
establishment of whiplash pappusgrass from seed in south 
Texas.  These plantings indicate good seed viability and 
persistence, an important characteristic for rangeland seed 
mix components in south Texas.  Plantings have shown 
that seeding in the fall season has been superior to spring 
plantings for establishment of pappusgrass in south Texas.  
 
The recommended seeding rate for pure stands of 
whiplash pappusgrass is 3 lbs. pure live seed per acre. 
Seed coatings (talc based) increase the flowability of seed 
through standard seed drills. Successful establishment has 
been obtained from both drill and broadcast plantings. 
 
Management 
Whiplash pappusgrass seed fields should be mowed or 
burned annually to promote vigorous growth. Deep soil 
tillage or frequent close cultivation is also recommended 
to promote seed production.  Consult your local 
Agriculture Extension office for herbicide 
recommendations.   
 

 
 

 

References 
Gould, F.W. 1975. The Grasses of Texas. Texas A&M 

University Press. College Station, TX. 
Reeder J.R. and L.J. Toolin. 1989. Notes on 

Pappophorum (Gramineae: Pappophoreae). 
Systematic Botany 14:3, 349-358. 

 
Smith, F., W. Ocumpaugh, J. Lloyd-Reilley, K. Pawelek, 
S. Maher, and J. Garza. 2010. Notice of Release of 
Webb Germplasm Whiplash Pappusgrass: Selected 
Class of Natural Germplasm. South Texas Natives 
CKWRI-TAMUK, Kingsville, TX. 

 
Citation 
Maher, S. and J. Lloyd-Reilley. 2010. Plant fact sheet for 
whiplash pappusgrass (Pappophorum vaginatum). 
USDA-Natural Resources Conservation Service, E. 
“Kika” de la Garza Plant Materials Center. Kingsville, 
TX. 

Published October, 2010 

Edited:  

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

 

 

 

 

 

Whiplash Pappusgrass Seedhead © Forrest Smith, South Texas Natives 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Common pests of whiplash pappusgrass seed include fall 
armyworms (Spodoptera spp.), thrips (Thrips spp.), and 
rice stink bugs (Oebalus pugnax). Control of the pests 
may be necessary in order to produce seed crops in dry 
years under irrigation. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
Webb Germplasm whiplash pappusgrass was released by 
South Texas Natives and the E. “Kika” de la Garza Plant 
Materials Center in 2010 as a selected plant material class 
of certified seed (natural track).   
This release is comprised of three collections from three 
different south Texas counties (Smith et al. 2010).    
 
Pima Germplasm pima pappusgrass from Arizona was 
released in 2006 by the Tucson Plant Materials Center.  
Pima Germplasm is a composite of 16 accessions 
collected from native stands in southern Arizona.   No 
selection was made in order to maximize the genetic 
adaptability of the release.  
 
Prepared By  
USDA NRCS E. “Kika” de la Garza Plant Materials 
Center, Kingsville, Texas 
 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

