 

 

 

 

  Plant Fact Sheet

Uses 
Pollinator habitat: Penstemon attenuatus is a source of 
pollen and nectar for a variety of bees, including honey 
bees and native bumble bees, as well as butterflies and 
moths. 
 
Rangeland diversification: This plant can be included in 
seeding mixtures to improve the diversity of rangelands. 
 
Ornamental: Penstemon attenuatus is very attractive and 
easy to manage as an ornamental in urban, water-saving 
landscapes.  It is hardy to USDA Plant Hardiness Zone 4.   

Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Description and Adaptation 
General:  Figwort family (Scrophulariaceae).  Penstemon 
attenuatus is a native, perennial forb that grows from a 
dense crown to a height of 10 to 90 cm (4 to 35 in).  
Leaves are dark green, opposite and have smooth edges, 
however the edges of P. attenuatus var. attenuatus leaves 
are often, at least in part, finely toothed.  Basal leaves 
have petioles, and are up to 4 cm (1.5 in) wide and 17 cm 
(7 in) long.  Stem leaves are smaller and mostly clasping.  
Flowers bloom in May and June, and can be blue to 
purple and pink, or pale yellow to nearly white.  The 
inflorescence consists of two whorls of flowers around the 
stem at each leaf axis.  Flowers have five long petals with 
translucent edges, and are 1 to 2 cm (3/8 to 3/4 in) long.  
The petals are fused to form a tube that is expanded 
toward the mouth and has two lips.  The lower lip and 
stamens are hairy.  Seeds are dark brown, round, and 
occur in capsules 3 to 6 mm (1/8 to 1/4 in) long.  Overall 
the appearance of P. attenuatus is very similar to other 
Penstemon species, causing difficulties in identification.  
 
Penstemon attenuatus is adapted to areas receiving 30 to 
64 cm (12 to 25 in) annual precipitation at elevations up 
to 3,000 m (5,000 ft).  It grows in well-drained, medium 
textured soils in dry meadows and on moist, open to 
wooded slopes in the mountains and foothills. 

TAPER-LEAVED 

PENSTEMON 

Penstemon attenuatus Douglas ex 

Lindl. 

Plant Symbol = PEAT3 

Contributed by: NRCS Plant Materials Center, Pullman, 
WA 
 

Penstemon attenuatus. Pamela Pavek 

 

Alternative Names 
Common Alternate Names: taper-leaved penstemon, 
sulphur penstemon, sulphur beardtongue (P. attenuatus 
var. palustris), south Idaho penstemon (P. attenuatus var. 
militaris), small penstemon (P. attenuatus var. 
pseudoprocerus) 
 
Scientific Alternate Names:  None 

 

 

 

 

 

the soil with a roller packer.  When using a broadcast 
seeding method, the seeding rate should be doubled. 
 
To establish plants by seedlings, the seed should be 
planted in containers in October, left outside to stratify in 
cold and moist conditions for a minimum of 90 days, and 
moved into a greenhouse in January.  After growing in a 
greenhouse for three to four months, the plants should be 
hardened off in a cold frame for two to four weeks prior 
to transplanting to a prepared field site in the spring.  
Ideal plant spacing is 15 to 45 cm (6 to 18 in).   

Management 
Penstemon attenuatus is able to withstand infrequent 
mowing.  This method may be used for weed control in 
newly-established forb plantings, however mowing 
should be delayed until after seed maturity.  Pre-emergent 
herbicides can be used to control annual weeds in fields 
with at least one year of growth, or where seedlings have 
been transplanted.   

Pests and Potential Problems 
None known. 

Environmental Concerns 
None. 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
None, however seeds and seedlings are available through 
several vendors. 

Prepared By  
Pamela L.S. Pavek, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Pullman, Washington 
 
David M. Skinner, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Pullman, Washington (retired) 

Citation 
Pavek, P.L.S., and D.M. Skinner 2012. Plant fact sheet for 
taper-leaved penstemon (Penstemon attenuatus). USDA-
Natural Resources Conservation Service, Pullman Plant 
Materials Center. Pullman, WA. 

Published February 2012 
Edited: 27Jan2012 dms; 07Feb2012 mes; 17Feb2012 jab; 
17Feb2012plsp 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

Taper-leaf penstemon distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS 
Database. 

For updated distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 

Penstemon attenuatus var. attenuatus. G.D. Carr, 
University of Washington Burke Herbarium 

Establishment 
Plants can be established by seed or seedlings.  Seed 
should be drilled into a firm, weed-free seed bed in the 
fall at a rate of 1.65 kg PLS/ha (1.5 lb PLS/ac).  If the 
seed is planted in a mix, the seeding rate should be 
adjusted according to the proportion of P. attenuatus in 
the mix. The drill should be set no deeper than 0.3 cm 
(1/8 in) or the seed should be placed in a separate drill 
box (with other small-seeded species) and the tubes for 
this box should be pulled so the seed is dropped on the 
soil surface.  Drag chains or press wheels should be used 
as long as the seed is not covered with more than 0.3 cm 
(1/8 in) of soil.  The seed can also be broadcast onto the 
soil surface with a broadcast spreader, and pressed into 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

