BEAKED PANICGRASS 

Panicum anceps Michx. 

Plant Symbol = PAAN 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS East Texas Plant Materials 
Center 

Melinda Brakie, East Texas Plant Materials Center  

  

Alternate Names 
beaked panicum, spreading panicum  

Uses 
Livestock: 
Beaked panicgrass is grazed by cattle and is of good value 
for grazing.  
 
Wildlife: 
Deer will graze beaked panicgrass. The seed are eaten by 
upland birds and some waterfowl.  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
 
Description and Adaptation  
Beaked panicgrass is a native, warm season perennial and 
a member of the grass family (Poaceae). This grass grows 
from 2 to 4 feet tall (60 to 120 cm). The seedhead 
(inflorescence) is an open panicle 6 to 14 inches long (15 
to 35 cm) and each spikelet ¼” to 1/8” long. The second 
glume is curved at the end like a bird’s beak, hence the 
common name.  
 
Vegetative growth begins in February and is usually 
completed by May or June. Seed is ready for harvest in 
September. Beaked panicgrass is a prolific seed producer.  

 

Plant Fact Sheet

Beaked panicgrass occurs from New York to Florida west 
to Kansas and Texas. In Texas, it is found in the eastern 
half of the state. This plant prefers moist to wet soils. This 
plant is found growing in bottomland freshwater marshes 
and swamps on sandy soils. Beaked panicgrass grows best 
under 30 to 35 percent shade. The plants form large 
clumps as they spread from short rhizomes.  
 

 

Melinda Brakie, East Texas Plant Materials Center  

Known Distribution 
Please consult the PLANTS web site for the current 
distribution of this species. 

  

Establishment 
Beaked panicgrass reproduces from seeds, tillers, and 
rhizomes. The seeds should be planted in the fall or early 
winter. If planting in the spring, treatment to overcome 
seed dormancy is necessary for satisfactory stand 
establishment. A common method for increasing seed 
germination is a cold/moist stratification treatment.  
 
Plant vegetative material on three foot centers in the 
spring.  
 
Management 
Beaked panicgrass is grazed by cattle and horses. This 
plant contributes small quantities of forage since it is 
rarely abundant except on small areas. Close grazing 
causes the plant’s basal tufts to spread widely and the 
leaves form a dense cover over small areas. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems  
Check with your local extension service for recommended 
herbicides if control is needed.   

Environmental Concerns  
Beaked panicgrass has no known pests or problems.  

 
 

 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
Presently, there are no commercial releases of beaked 
panicgrass. 

Prepared By  
Melinda Brakie, USDA NRCS East Texas Plant Materials 
Center, Nacogdoches, Texas  
 
Species Coordinator: 
Melinda Brakie, USDA NRCS East Texas Plant Materials 
Center, Nacogdoches, Texas  

Published:  September 2007 

Edited:  070912jsp 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

