HALL’S PANICUM  

Panicum hallii Vasey var. filipes 

(Scribn.) Waller 
Plant Symbol = PAHAF 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS E. “Kika” de la Garza 
Plant Materials Center 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Description and Adaptation 
Hall’s panicum is a short-lived, native, warm season, 
perennial bunchgrass with stiffly erect stems.  Mature 
foliage height ranges from 0.5 to 2.5 feet.  Leaves are 
mostly in a basal clump, curling with drying and age.  The 
inflorescence is an open panicle with a pinkish or purplish 
tint.    
 
Hall’s panicum grows on sandy to clayey calcareous soils.  
It will tolerate soils that are weakly saline.  Its natural 
range extends from Oklahoma south into Mexico, east to 
Louisiana, and west to Arizona. 
 

Hall’s panicum  plant. Photo by Shelly Maher, STPMC, Kingsville, TX. 

Alternate Names 
Hall’s panicgrass, Filly panicum 

Uses 
Hall’s panicum [Panicum hallii Vasey var. filipes 
(Scribn.) Waller] is recommended for highway rights-of-
way plantings because of its short stature.  It also can 
provide plant diversity to rangeland plantings.   
 
Wildlife:  Hall’s panicum provides only fair forage for 
wildlife.  However, it is a good seed producer, and its 
seeds can provide a source of food for birds and other 
wildlife.   

 

Hall’s panicum var. filipes distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS 
Database. 

 

For updated distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 

Establishment 
Seedbed preparation should begin well in advance of 
planting.  Planting can be scheduled for early spring, or 
where there are few cool-season weeds Hall’s panicum 
can be planted in the fall.  Establish a clean, weed-free 
seedbed by either tillage or herbicides.  Prior to planting, 
the site should be firm and have accumulated soil 
moisture.   
 

 

Hall’s panicum is best seeded using a grass drill to ensure 
a good planting of the small seed.  Broadcast seeding may 
be used in areas not easily planted with a drill, but some 
type of additional coverage such as culti-packing or light 
dragging will be beneficial to ensure good seed to soil 
contact.  Seed should be planted 1/8 to 1/4 inch deep.  It is 
better to plant too shallow than too deep.   
 
Soil analysis should be performed prior to planting to 
determine the necessary levels of nitrogen, phosphorus 
and potassium.  Nitrogen should not be applied until the 
stand is established.  If one plant per square foot has 
become established than the planting has been successful. 

Pests and Potential Problems 
Control of pests may be necessary in order to produce 
seed crops in dry years under irrigation. 

Environmental Concerns 
There are no known environmental concerns associated 
with Hall’s panicum.   

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
Oso Germplasm Hall’s panicum is a selected plant 
material cooperatively released in 2011 with Texas A&M 
University-Kingsville, Caesar Kleberg Wildlife Research 
Institute, South Texas Natives.  It is a blend comprised of 
two natural populations of Hall’s panicum collected in the 
South Texas Counties of Nueces and Cameron.  It is a 
selected plant material class of certified seed (natural 
track).  These two populations were chosen for release 
from comparisons of twenty-nine collections.  The 
selected accessions have superior active seed germination, 
greater overall seed production, and higher plant vigor 
ratings than other collections evaluated.  No intentional 
breeding, selection or genetic manipulation was carried 
out within these populations.  For calibration purposes, 
Oso Germplasm hall’s panicum contains approximately 
855,566 seeds per bulk pound.  A seeding rate of 1 pound 
of pure live seed (PLS) per acre is recommended.  In 
planting mixtures reduce the rate according to the percent 
of Hall’s panicum in the mixture.  

Prepared By  
John Lloyd-Reilley and Shelly Maher, 
USDA-NRCS, E. “Kika” de la Garza Plant Materials 
Center, Kingsville, Texas 

Oso Germplasm Hall’s panicum plants in a seed increase field.  Photo 
by Shelly Maher, STPMC, Kingsville, TX. 

Management 
Hall’s panicum should not be grazed the first year.  After 
a stand is established, either continuous or rotational 
grazing can be used. Contact your local USDA-NRCS 
field office for assistance in planning and applying 
prescribed grazing.   
 
Plants should be allowed to produce seed each year 
because of the short-lived nature of the plant. 

 

 

Citation 
Lloyd-Reilley, J. and S. Maher. 2011. Plant fact sheet for  
Hall’s panicum [Panicum hallii Vasey var. filipes 
(Scribn.) Waller]. USDA-Natural Resources Conservation 
Service, E. “Kika” de la Garza Plant Materials Center.  
Kingsville, Texas 78363.   

 

Published August 2011 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

