            Plant Fact Sheet  

 

Adaptation and Distribution 
Sawtooth oak is native to eastern Asia but was 
introduced into the eastern United States around 
1920.  The range of adaptation extends from 
Northern Florida west to eastern Texas and 
Oklahoma, northward through Missouri to New York 

 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 

SAWTOOTH OAK 

Quercus acutissima 

Carruthers 

Plant Symbol = QUAC80 

 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Northeast Plant 
Materials Program 
 

C. Miller 
USDA NRCS 

 
Uses 
The primary use for this species is as a wildlife food 
source and cover. It is also a good shade tree. 

Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Description 
Sawtooth oak is a large species, reaching a mature 
height of 70 feet.  The leaves are similar to those of 
the chestnut but are smaller, 4-8 inches, and have 
pointed teeth.  The acorns are also small in size, 
ranging from 5/8-3/4 inch long and are enclosed in 
cups with long, spreading, recurving scales.  
Approximately 2/3 of the nut is covered by the cup.  
Trees produce about 150 acorns per pound. 

 

 

 

and into southern New England.  On exposed sites in 
the northern Finger Lakes Region of New York, it 
may winterkill.  Sawtooth oak is winter hardy and 
can be grown in soils from sandy loam to clay loam.  
However, the best performance is achieved in deep, 
well-drained soils.  It can also be grown on reclaimed 
surface mined land where favorable moisture 
conditions are present and pH is above 5.0. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 
 
Establishment 
One year old seedlings should be planted 15-20 feet 
apart for maximum acorn production.  In areas where 
multiple rows are used, the spacing should be no less 
than 20 feet apart.  There should be at least 15 plants 
per planting for effective wind pollination.  Site 
preparation consists of clearing the existing 
vegetation from an area at least 3 feet in diameter 
around the newly planted seedling.  The seedling 
should be planted at the same depth it was growing at 
in the nursery.  At the bottom of the hole, apply a 
handful of 10-10-10 or 18-8-3 fertilizer pellets.  
Cover the pellets with 2-3 inches of soil.  Do not 
allow the seedling to come in contact with the 
fertilizer.  Water and mulch immediately to conserve 
water and discourage weeds. 

If planting by acorns, begin in the early fall.  Plant 
acorns 3/4-1 inch deep.  The seedlings should not be 
transplanted until they reach 12-18 inches in height. 

Management 
To achieve desired results, keep competition to a 
minimum for 2 years.  By this time, the seedlings 
should be well established.  If growth is stunted, 
eliminate competition and apply a complete fertilizer. 

Sawtooth oak seedlings do not do well in poorly 
drained soils or in areas subject to flooding.  If under 
water for 24 hours in the summer, they will not 
survive.  

This plant has been found to be resistant to disease 
and insect damage. 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Gobbler’ was released in 1986 by the Quicksand 
Plant Materials Center in cooperation with the 

 

 

 

 

 

Kentucky Agricultural Experiment Station, Kentucky 
Department of Fish & Wildlife, and the Kentucky 
Division of Forestry.  It was selected for resistance to 
insects and disease, wildlife food value, and growth 
form compared to similar use species.  Plant 
materials are available from nurseries throughout the 
region. 

Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
USDA NRCS Northeast Plant Materials Program 

 

 

Edited: 05Feb2002 JLK; 060815 jsp 
 
For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or Conservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

 

The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national origin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 

To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 

Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation 
Service.  

 

 

