BUR OAK 

Quercus macrocarpa Michx. 

Plant Symbol = QUMA2 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program 

 

Photo by Joe Scianna, USDA-NRCS, Bridger, Montana 

Uses 
Windbreaks and Shelterbelts:  Bur oak is recommended as 
a medium to tall component in windbreak and shelterbelt 
systems.  Although modest in growth rate, especially in 
the western U.S., it is a strong-wooded and long lived 
species. 
 
Riparian Forest Buffers:  Bur oak can be used in riparian 
forest buffer plantings and may be a suitable substitute, 
depending on site conditions, for green ash (Fraxinus 
pennsylvanica) and Russian olive (Elaeagnus 
angustifolia).   
 
Woody Draw Restoration:  Bur oak is a natural 
component of woody draws in the central and western 
Great Plains.  Seedlings grown in containers are preferred 
over bareroot stock and direct sowing. 
 
Timber:  The wood of bur oak is quite valuable and is 
often marketed as “white oak.”  It is used in the 

 
 

 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

manufacture of cabinets, barrels, hardwood flooring, and 
fence posts. 
 
Ornamental:  Bur oak makes an excellent landscape 
specimen, and is well suited to drought tolerant 
landscapes.  Its strong branches make it a good choice for 
street trees provided it has ample space to accommodate 
its wide spreading basal branches.   
 
Wildlife:  Bur oak is an excellent source of food for many 
wildlife species including deer, turkeys, squirrels, rabbits, 
raccoons, and rodents.  As it reaches maturity it provides 
roosting, loafing, and nesting for numerous species of 
birds. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
Bur oak or mossycup oak is a medium- to tall-stature 
deciduous tree widely distributed across the United States.  
Bur oak has several desirable attributes including strong 
branches, drought tolerance, winter hardiness, and 
freedom from serious insects or diseases.  
 
On good sites, bur oak has a spreading habit with a broad 
crown; massive bole; and low, large branches.  It is 
capable of reaching heights over 80 feet and individual 
trees up to 100 feet are found on good sites.  At the far 
western edge of its range, heights of 50 feet can be 
considered about the upper limits of growth. 
 
Adaptation and Distribution 
Bur oak has a large native range extending from Nova 
Scotia, west to Manitoba, south through Kansas to Texas, 
east to Alabama, and northeast to Virginia and New 
England.  Landscape specimens can be found in many 
western states outside of its native range.  Most 
references list bur oak as hardy in  
USDA Winter Hardiness Zones 4 to 8, although Zone 2 is 
given in at least one source.  Bur oak is considered only 
moderately shade tolerant. 
 
Although favoring rich alluvial bottomland, bur oak 
grows well on rocky hillsides, limestone soils, droughty 
soils, clayey sites, and other marginal sites -- given full 
sun conditions.  This species performed better than most 
others tested on coal-mine spoils of pH 5.6 in eastern 
Kansas.  In the western United States, bur oak is 
considered a pioneer species and is capable of invading 

 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
‘Lippert’ bur oak, released in 1994 by the Manhattan, 
Kansas Plant Materials Center, is a seed propagated 
cultivar recommended for conservation use in multi-row 
windbreaks, reforestation for watershed protection, and 
wildlife habitat plantings. 
 
‘Boomer’ bur oak was released by the James E “Bud” 
Smith Plant Materials Center in Knox City, Texas.  It is 
recommended for conservation use in windbreaks, as a 
landscape plant for urban and recreational areas, and for 
wildlife food and shelter. 
 
Ekalaka Germplasm bur oak is a Selected Class pre-
varietal selection of bur oak released by the Bridger, 
Montana Plant Materials Center in 2009 for improved rate 
of height growth, percentage seedling survival, and vigor 
rating.  It is recommended for various conservation 
applications such as windbreaks, shelterbelts, riparian 
forest buffers, Xeriscapes®
projects, and wildlife plantings.   
 
Bur oak seed is readily available through commercial seed 
sources in the central and western United States.  
Seedlings can be purchased from both state and 
commercial nurseries.  Foundation seed of Plant Materials 
Program selections is available by contacting the 
releasing Plant Materials Center or respective Plant 
Materials Specialist. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:  
Joseph D. Scianna 
Research Horticulturist 
USDA-NRCS 
Bridger, Montana 

, woody draw restoration 

Published November, 2009 

Edited:  28Aug09JSJ 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

prairie grasslands.  In the eastern Great Plains it occurs 
primarily along stream bottoms and stream terraces in 
association with green ash, boxelder (Acer negundo), and 
cottonwood (Populus sp.).  Bur oak is, however, 
intolerant of flooding. 
 
For a current distribution map, please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS web site. 
 
Establishment 
Cross pollination between individual trees appears to be 
favored.  Acorns ripen in one year, falling as early as 
August or as late as November depending on the tree and 
location.  Acorns usually germinate immediately without 
pretreatment, but may require cold:moist stratification 
when collected from northern sources.  Average minimum 
seed-bearing age of forest trees is approximately 35 years 
with best production typically between 75 to 150 years.  
Good crops usually occur every two to three years.  It 
may be necessary to check seed-bearing trees regularly in 
order to assure harvesting the acorns before the wildlife 
do.  Under fallow, dryland conditions in Bridger, 
Montana, bur oak trees began producing substantial 
amounts of seed by 10 years of age. 
 
Bur oak is considered moderately tolerant to intolerant to 
shade.  Initial height growth is normally slow for the first 
three to five years, then moderate as the plant becomes 
established.  Seedlings produce a vigorous and aggressive 
taproot that allows this species to utilize sub-surface 
moisture and tolerate drought.  Container produced 
seedlings, cultivated in tall, narrow pots and at least two 
years of age are the preferred stock type. 
 
Management 
Protection from wildlife is highly recommended for all 
bur oak plantings as this species is preferred browse for 
deer and rabbits.  Its slow initial growth warrants the use 
of weed barrier or other forms of vegetation control for 
reducing plant competition.  Supplemental water may 
result in modest increases in seedling survival and 
biomass production on droughty sites.  Supplemental 
fertility is not considered necessary for most conservation 
plantings in the northern Great Plains and Intermountain 
West.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Reported insect problems include oak webworm, oak 
skeletonizer, leaf miner, variable oakleaf caterpillar, oak 
lacebug, and June beetles.  Oak lacebug can be a serious 
problem in shelterbelt plantings, especially during 
drought conditions.  Serious insect and disease problems 
are relatively limited for bur oak in the western United 
States.   
 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 
 
 

 

