 

 

OILSEED RADISH 

Raphanus sativus L. 
Plant Symbol = RASA2 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS Booneville Plant Materials 
Center, Arkansas 

 
Dr. Ray Weil harvesting oilseed radish. Photo provided by Dr. Ray Weil, 
University of Maryland. 
 
Alternative Names 
Common Names:  forage radish, fodder radish, tillage 
radish®, radish ripper, daikon, Japanese radish 
 
Scientific Names:  Raphanus sativus var.oleifer Stokes, 
Raphanus sativus L. ssp. Oleiferus, Raphanus sativus L. 
var. oleiformis Pers.  

Uses 
Cover Crop: Oilseed radish is a cover crop planted in 
early fall or after harvest of the primary crop. Planting 
occurs after the harvest of cash crops such as wheat, rye, 
early potatoes, pickling cucumbers, snap beans, or celery. 
It can also be aerial seeded into standing corn, soybean, or 
cotton prior to harvest. Oilseed radish has a uniquely deep 
taproot, which can reach a depth of six feet. It develops an 
enlarged upper portion of the taproot, which can reach 12 
to 20 inches in length and 2 inches in diameter. This deep-
rooting growth habit is capable of treating multiple 
resource concerns on cropland such as: 
 
Soil Compaction: The thick taproot penetrates compacted 
soil layers. The root decomposes in the spring and leaves 
large, deep holes in the soil. These holes enable water, air, 
and cash crop roots to penetrate the soil in the summer 
when the soil is dry and hard. Planting oilseed radish is an 
alternative to using machinery to deeply rip or plow the 
soil, and can be used by farmers with no-till systems. 
 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

Nitrate leaching: The deep taproot can scavenge nitrogen 
in the soil left by the previous crop. The roots of oilseed 
radish absorb nitrogen at greater depths than other crops 
and keep it from leaching into the groundwater. When the 
plant decomposes in the spring, nitrogen is released back 
to the cash crop.   
 
Weed Management: Oilseed radish seedlings can emerge 
as soon as 3 days after planting (if conditions are 
favorable), and can quickly grow and suppress weeds. 
Biomass decomposes quickly and may leave the seedbed 
ready for planting, without the need to till leftover 
residue. 

Pest Management: Like other plants in the Brassicaceae 
(mustard) family, the roots of oilseed radish exude 
chemicals that help suppress soil pests like nematodes. 

Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Weediness 
To prevent oilseed radish from becoming a weed pest, kill 
the crop before plants produce seed. Seeds may remain 
viable in the soil for multiple growing seasons, and can 
germinate when the cash crop is growing. This plant may 
become weedy or invasive in some regions or habitats and 
may displace desirable vegetation if not properly 
managed. Please consult with your local NRCS Field 
Office, Cooperative Extension Service office, state natural 
resource, or state agriculture department regarding its 
status and use. Weed information is also available from 
the PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/. Please 
consult the Related Web Sites on the Plant Profile for this 
species for further information. 

Description and Adaptation 
Oilseed radish is a coarse winter annual in the 
Brassicaceae (or Cruciferae) family. Leaves grow in a 
basal rosette to 2-3 feet tall. Seed stalks elongate from the 
rosette. Pink, white, or lavender flowers bloom in spring.  
The Brassicaceae family also produces edible crops such 
as broccoli and cabbage. Oilseed radish differs from 
typical radish because it develops a thick, white taproot 
that can grow 1-2 inches in diameter and up to 1 foot in 
length. Plants give off a foul “rotten egg-like” odor when 
they decompose in the spring.  
 
Oilseed radish grows best in cool, moist growing 
conditions (most often during the fall). Plants are not 

 

 

 

tolerant of shade, standing water, or severely nitrogen-
deficient soils. Plants cannot survive freezing 
temperatures of 20⁰F or below. 
 
 

 

 
Oilseed radish distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database. 

For updated distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 

Establishment 
Prepare a clean, firm, weed-free seedbed prior to planting 
oilseed radish. Adjust planting times according to the first 
expected frosts. Oilseed radish will die or sustain damage 
if temperatures drop below 20⁰F. In the Mid-Atlantic, 
planting times are generally late August or early 
September. Use the small grain box (seed is similar in 
size to alfalfa) on a conventional or no-till drill. It is 
suggested that you plant a minimum of 6-10 lb/acre of 
pure live seed (PLS). Planting depth should be ¼ to ½ 
inch. Drilling yields more successful stands, but seed can 
also be broadcast at a higher rate of 12-14 PLS lb/acre. 
Follow broadcast seeding with a light disking, 
cultipacking, or rolling with water-filled roller. Aerial 
seeding can be done on standing crops. Increase seeding 
rates to 14-16 PLS lb/acre and broadcast into standing 
corn or soybean canopies when lower leaves begin to turn 
yellow. Cotton crops can be aerially seeded prior to 
defoliation and harvest.  

Management 
Oilseed radish establishes quickly if soil moisture is 
adequate (soil moisture varies by soil texture). Plants will 
scavenge leftover nitrogen in the soil profile and do not 
need additional fertilization. The most important 
management consideration when planting oilseed radish is 
ensuring that plants do not go to seed. When the taproots 
decompose, a foul rotten-egg or natural gas-like odor is 
emitted. 

Pests and Potential Problems 

Avoid planting oilseed radish as a cover crop when the 
cash crop includes broccoli, cabbage, radish, or other 
members of the mustard family because it can encourage 
the establishment of some pathogens and pests. Rotate 
other cover crop species with oilseed radish to avoid pest 
and pathogen problems.  
 
Control/Cover Crop Termination 
Oilseed radish must be killed prior to planting of the cash 
crop to allow cash crop germination. Oilseed radish will 
naturally die in winter conditions/frost when temperatures 
fall below 20°F and decompose naturally in the soil.  
If plants do not winterkill, mowing, grazing, lightly 
disking, or spraying with appropriate herbicide treatment 
is recommended at flowering before seed set. Please 
contact your local agricultural extension specialist or 
county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use it safely. Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method. Trade names 
and control measures appear in this document only to 
provide specific information.  USDA NRCS does not 
guarantee or warranty the products and control methods 
named, and other products may be equally effective. 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
Seeds are available from select commercial sources, but 
can be more expensive than many other cover crop 
species. There are several trademark varieties in the 
United States, including Tillage Radish® and 
Groundhog™. Many cultivars including ‘Adagio’, 
‘Arena’, ‘Colonel’, ‘Remonta’ ‘Revena’, ‘Rimbo’, and 
‘Ultimo’ have European origins. Commercially available 
“common” varieties are also sold under ‘VNS’ for variety 
not stated.  

Prepared By Alayna Jacobs, USDA-NRCS Booneville 
Plant Materials Center, Arkansas 

Citation 
Jacobs, A. 2012. Plant fact sheet for oilseed radish 
(Raphanus sativus var. oleiformis). USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Booneville Plant 
Materials Center, Booneville, AR.  

Published May 2012 

Edited: May2012 aym, May2012cs, May2012 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov>

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

