 

 

 

 

  Plant Fact Sheet

MISSOURI 

GOLDENROD 

 
Contributed by:  NRCS Plant Materials Center, Pullman, 
WA 
 

Solidago missouriensis Nutt. 

Plant Symbol = SOMI2 

 

 
Solidago missouriensis.  Rod Gilbert, University of Washington 
Burke Herbarium 
 
Alternate Names 
Prairie goldenrod, Tolmie’s goldenrod (S. missouriensis 
var. tolmieana)  
 
Uses 
Pollinator habitat: Solidago species provide vital sources 
of pollen and nectar for bees and other insects in the late 
summer and fall throughout North America. 
 
Rangeland revegetation: Missouri goldenrod can be used 
for revegetation of disturbed areas, for mine spoil 
reclamation, and soil stabilization. 

 

 
Forage:  This plant has poor forage value, however may 
be grazed by sheep, cattle, deer and antelope.   
 
Ethnobotanical:  Native Americans chewed leaves and 
flowers of this plant to relieve sore throats, and chewed 
roots to relieve toothache (Stubbendieck et al. 2003). 
 
Ornamental: Missouri goldenrod is not typically planted 
in a landscaped setting due to its spreading rhizomatous 
growth.  However, it is possible to manage plants by 
planting in a pot submersed in the ground, or by removing 
new growth each year.  Seed dispersal can be controlled 
by removing flower heads prior to seed ripening. 
 
Status 
Missouri goldenrod is the state flower of Nebraska, and is 
listed as threatened in Michigan.  Consult the PLANTS 
Web site and your State Department of Natural Resources 
for this plant’s current status (e.g., threatened or 
endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland 
indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
Goldenrods have a reputation of being weedy due to their 
aggressive rhizomatous growth.  However, in stable 
rangeland environments they seldom achieve densities 
that are problematic.  Please consult with your local 
NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service 
office, state natural resource, or state agriculture 
department regarding this plant’s status and management.   

Description and Adaptation 
General:  Sunflower family (Asteraceae).  Solidago 
missouriensis is a native, warm-season, short-lived 
perennial.  Stems grow singularly or in group from a 
woody base or creeping rhizome.  Stems are reddish-
green, smooth, slender, erect and are 8 to 36 inches tall. 
Leaves are alternate, triple-nerved and have entire or 
sparsely serrated edges.  Basal leaves are up to 12 inches 
long and 1 inch wide, and have short petioles. Upper 
leaves are smaller and sessile.  Numerous inflorescences 
form on curved panicle branches.  Inflorescences have 7 
to 13 yellow disc flowers and 8 to 13 yellow ray flowers, 
and bloom July through October.  Seeds are brown, 
cylindrical, smooth or hairy, and have white bristly 
pappus.  
 
Missouri goldenrod is adapted to areas receiving 12 to 35 
inches of annual precipitation at elevations up to 10,600 
feet.  Plants grow well in sandy loam to clay loam soils, 
and poorly in gravel or dense clay.  Plants are tolerant of 
weakly acidic to moderately basic and weakly saline soil.   

 

Plants grow on dry, open slopes in upland prairies, plains, 
meadows, deciduous and evergreen forests, deserts, and 
along roadsides, railroads, ditches and fences.   

Missouri goldenrod is found in most Midwestern and 
western states in the U.S., and in the south-central and 
southwest provinces of Canada.  There are four varieties:  
var. fasciculata, var. missouriensis, var. tenuissima, and 
var. tolmieana (Tolmie’s goldenrod). For current 
distribution of this species and varieties, consult the Plant 
Profile page on the PLANTS Web site. 
 

Management 
This plant spreads by rhizomes and by seed.  Where plant 
spread is not desired, seedlings should be planted in a 
large pot or barrel submersed in the soil, or new growth 
should be cut and removed each year.  To prevent seed 
dispersal, flower heads should be removed prior to seed 
ripening.  Plants will withstand vigorous cutting, and will 
regrow if cut during the growing season.  

Pests and Potential Problems 
Missouri goldenrod can be damaged by a native leaf 
feeding beetle, Trirhabda canadensis (Skinner 2004). 

Environmental Concerns 
This plant may form dense stands in some habitats, 
particularly where ground is open and disturbed.  To 
prevent dense stands from forming, seed Missouri 
goldenrod at low densities or plant in small areas. 

Control 
If control of this species is desired, contact your local 
agricultural extension specialist or county weed specialist 
to learn what works best in your area and how to use it 
safely.  Always read label and safety instructions for any 
control method.   

Missouri goldenrod distribution from the USDA PLANTS Database 

Establishment 
Plants can be established by seed, seedlings, or rhizomes.  
Seed should be planted into a firm, weed-free seed bed at 
a rate of 1 lb PLS/ac and at a depth of 0.125 to 0.25 
inches.  If planted in a mix, the seeding rate should be 
adjusted according to the proportion of the mix.  The seed 
does not require a cold moist period for optimal 
germination (Skinner 2004) therefore can be planted in 
the spring or fall.   
 
Plants established by seedlings can be started by sowing 
seed in containers in January and placed in a greenhouse.  
Seed should be covered lightly with soil and kept moist 
until germination.  A layer of pea gravel can be applied to 
the soil surface to prevent seeds from floating.  Plants 
should be moved to a cold-frame in late March or early 
April and hardened off for 2 to 4 weeks prior to 
transplanting into a prepared field site in early May.  
Plants should be spaced 1 to 2 feet apart. 

Plants can also be established by rhizomes.  Sections of 
rhizomes should be collected from cultivated plants or 
approved areas, kept moist during transport, and replanted 
in a prepared field site.   

 

 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
None, however seed and seedlings are available from 
multiple vendors. 

Prepared By  
Pamela L.S. Pavek, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center,  
Pullman, Washington 
 
References 
Skinner, D. 2007.  Unpublished data. USDA NRCS Plant 

Materials Center, Pullman, WA.  

Stubbendieck, J., S.L. Hatch and L.M. Landholt. 2003. 
North American Wildland Plants: A Field Guide. 
University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln and London. 

Citation 
Pavek, P.L.S. 2012. Plant fact sheet for Missouri 
goldenrod (Solidago missouriensis). USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service. Pullman, WA. 

Published June 2012 

Edited: 18May2012jab; 25June2012plsp 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

