COMPASSPLANT 
Silphium laciniatum L. 

Plant Symbol = SILA3 

 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center 
Manhattan, Kansas 
 

 

Alan Shadow, NRCS, East Texas PMC, Nacogdoches, TX  
 
Alternate Names 
Rosinweed, gum weed, cut-leaf silphium, or turpentine 
plant 
 
Uses 
Livestock: It is reported that compass plant is palatable 
and nutritious and grazed by livestock especially in its 
juvenile state. It will decrease in heavily grazed pastures 
and eventually be removed from the site in continuously 
grazed situations.  
Native Americans: The powdered root of compass plant 
was used by the Pawnees to make a tea for individuals 
with general debility. The Indian children of several tribes 
used the resinous sap as a chewing gum to cleanse their 
teeth and sweeten their breath.  
Wildlife: Small mammals and birds eat the seed of 
compass plant. In grasslands the compass plant provides a 
sturdy perch for prairie song birds. The eastern kingbirds 
use the compass plant as a perch to locate and capture 
grassland insects. 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

Description and Adaptation 
General: Compass plant is a long lived, perennial member 
of the sunflower family. Its basal leaves and stems all 
arise from an underground crown. A large reddish brown 
tap root 1 to 2 inches in diameter is located just below the 
crown. The tap root rapidly looses diameter as it descends 
up to 16 feet into the prairie soil. The large basal leaves 
can be 15 to 24 inches long and are deeply cut like a giant 
pin oak leaf. The rigid, sand paper like leaves orient 
themselves in a north to south direction to avoid the direct 
rays of the midday sun, thus leading to the plants common 
name, compass plant. Stems are erect and number from 
one to several with an overall height of from 3 to 10 feet. 
The simple leaves are alternately arranged on the stem 
and are less divided, smaller and have direct attachment 
higher up on the stem. Leaves are leathery and stiff with 
rough surfaces and hairs occurring on the leaf main veins. 
Large yellow flower heads from 2 to 4 inches across are 
conspicuous on the upper half to two thirds of the stem in 
small clusters. Flowering begins in late June and proceeds 
through August. Flower heads begin opening at the top of 
the stem first. There are 15 to 34 narrow yellow petal 
flowers (ray florets) that are 1 to 2 inches long. The center 
of the flower contains the numerous disk florets with 
yellow corollas.  The fruit is a flattened achene about ½ 
inch long with a notched tip. Achenes develop on the 
outside of the head since the ray florets are the only fertile 
seed producing units on the flower. 
 
Distribution: Please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site. Compass plant grows 
in the eastern half of Kansas. It is found in the eastern 
section of the Great Plains from North Dakota to Texas 
and east to Ohio and Alabama.   
 
Establishment 
The easiest way to propagate compass plant is by planting 
stratified seed in the spring or unstratified seed in the fall. 
Moist stratification (60 days at 40 degrees F) and 
scarification will promote germination of this species. To 
scarify the seed, nick the seed coat with a sharp knife 
prior to planting. The initial year the seedling will exist as 
a single leaf, and it will normally take two to three years 
for the plant to mature and reproduce sexually. Much of 
the plants energy and carbon are invested in extensive 
root production the first few years. 
   
Management 
Seed heads can be harvested from production fields in late 
August or September. The seed heads can be run through 
a hammer mill to break out the seed units and release the 
achenes. Then the achenes can be run through a two 
screen cleaner to increase purity of the product. The seed 

 
 

 

Citation 
Wynia, R. 2009. Plant fact sheet for compassplant 
(Silphium laciniatum L.
Conservation Service, Kansas Plant Materials Center, 
Manhattan, Kansas  66502 

). USDA-Natural Resources 

Published June, 2009 

Edited: 090529 jsp 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

can be cleaned to a purity of 48 percent with 
approximately 18,400 seeds per pound. Seed lots cleaned 
at the Manhattan PMC have had purities as great as 96 % 
and a germination of 88 %. 
 
Compass plant seedlings have only a single leaf their first 
year of growth. Speculation has it that compass plant will 
not produce flowers until the second or third year of 
growth. Other plant enthusiasts indicate that perhaps 
compass plant needs four or five years to produce flowers 
and seed. Should compass plant be grown as a specimen 
plant it may need to be staked up to prevent its stems from 
being blown over by the wind. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
A disease was noted and studied on compass plant grown 
in Poland as a horticultural crop. The disease symptoms 
were noticed on approximately 15 percent of the 
population of plants. The plants exhibited stunting, 
yellowing and reduced inflorescence production. Oblong 
brown-purplish lesions were noticed on the plants stems 
in July. The causal agent isolated from the lesions was 
Alternaria alternata which was subsequently grown on 
artificial media and used to re-infect compass plant 
seedlings.  
Compass plant, grown in a cultivated situation, has also 
been known to have stems blown down when subjected to 
strong winds at full maturity.  
 
Environmental Concerns 
Compass plant does not spread vegetatively except as the 
clump of the original plant grows in diameter. This plant 
volunteers easily from seed, but does not spread actively.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
Two compass plant germplasm lines, NF-1 and NF-1 
Profuse Ligule, were developed by the Samuel Roberts 
Noble Foundation Inc. in Ardmore, OK. These 
germplasm lines should be useful in developing improved 
cultivars, novel germplasm, as well as studying the 
biology, ecology, and genetics of the compass plant. Seed 
stocks of the two lines will be maintained by the 
Biotechnology Group at the Noble Foundation. 
 
Prepared By and Species Coordinator: 
Richard Wynia, USDA NRCS Manhattan Plant Materials 
Center, Manhattan, KS 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

