CROOKED-STEM 

ASTER 

Symphyotrichum prenanthoides 
(Muhl. ex Willd.) G.L. Nesom 

Plant Symbol = SYPR6 

 
Contributed by: USDA, NRCS, National Plant Materials 

Center, Beltsville, MD  

 

 

 

Randall Roden, Prairie Nursery Inc. 
 
Alternate Names 
Crooked stem aster 
Zigzag aster 
Aster prenanthoides L. 
 
Uses 
Crooked stem aster is an adaptable, easy to grow ground 
cover for dry, sunny locations.  It is a native plant and can 
be part of a good wildlife seed mixture where native 
grasses and wildflowers are seeded together.  Ethno 
botanical: A tea made from the roots of crooked-stem 
aster has been used to treat fevers in babies and colds and 
kidney ailments in adults.    
 
Landscaping and wildlife: Crooked-stem aster creates 
showy mounds of blooms in summer and is excellent for 

 

 
 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

 

native landscape gardens.  Asters will grow on disturbed 
sites and can be used for wildlife habitat restoration.  
Crooked stem aster is attractive to pollinators, including 
long-tongued bees, short-tongued bees, small to medium-
sized butterflies, and skippers.  Many kinds of insects 
feed on the foliage and other parts of asters, including the 
caterpillars of the butterfly Chlosyne nycteis (Silvery 
Checkerspot) and many moth species.  Wild Turkey, 
other upland game birds and mammalian herbivores 
occasionally eat the seeds and foliage of asters, even 
though their food value is low.   
 
Status 
Crooked-stem aster is listed as a special concern in 
Connecticut and as threatened in Massachusetts.  Please 
consult the PLANTS Web site and your State Department 
of Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g. 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description and Adaptation  
Crooked-stem aster is a native, perennial wildflower that 
grows from 1 – 4 feet tall.  The aster’s rigid stems are 
much-branched from the base. The leaves are .5 – 3 
inches long, simple (not made up of multiple leaflets), and 
alternate (progressing singly up the stem).  The flowers 
are fragrant with approximately 30 blue ray florets per 
flower.  The disk florets are yellow and the bracts are 
glandular with long, green, loose or spreading tips.  
Flowers appear in summer and give way to flat, brown, 
hairy achenes (dry fruits).  Crooked-stem aster spreads 
through stolons (horizontal stems that produce new plants 
from buds). 
 
Distribution: Crooked-stem aster grows in moist, loamy 
soils, full sun to partial shade in riparian and forest edge 
habitats.  It is distributed from Ontario south to North 
Carolina and Tennessee (USDA cold hardiness zones 4 – 
7).   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 

Establishment 
Seed propagation 
Seeds can be collected from wild plants in the fall when 
the seed separate easily from the stems that attached them 
to the flower. Seeds should be collected in paper bags and 
allowed to dry for 1–2 weeks.  If seeds are sown directly, 
sow them five-eighths of an inch deep in the fall and sow 
thickly.  Plant a cover crop of a cool-season annual grass 
over the seedbed to protect seed over the winter.  If seeds 
are to be propagated in a container, they should be stored 
for 1–3 months at 30–40 degrees Fahrenheit before 
sowing.  Many species of Aster benefit from moisture 
during the cold storage (stratification) period.  Use a 
perlite/vermiculite mix for stratification.  The seed will 
germinate in 10 to 15 days at 72 degrees Fahrenheit.  
Germination to true leaf stage is 7 to 15 days.  Seedlings 
are thinned at this stage. 
 
Vegetative propagation 
Propagate by softwood cuttings taken in late spring. 
 
Management 
Crooked-stem aster colonizes by horizontal stems which 
grow at the soil surface, so thin it regularly to control its 
spread.  Crooked-stem aster may open up if it becomes 
too top-heavy, so prune it back by no more than half in 
mid-June to keep it thick.  After it goes dormant in late 
fall or early winter cut it back to the round level ring of 
leaves at the plants base.  Crooked-stem aster prefers 
neutral to slightly acidic soils. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Crooked stem aster is susceptible to many leaf spots, rusts 
and mildews which will affect the lower leaves but 
usually do no permanent damage.  The most destructive 
diseases in the cultivation of asters are various forms of 
stem-rot.  They are of fungus origin and are induced by 
allowing the plants to remain moist for an extended 
period of time.  The infection usually takes place in the 
seed-row, but often no effect is noticed until the plants are 
nearly full-grown, when they suddenly wilt and die.  The 
“yellow disease” causes the plants to have a bleached 
appearance and to make a spindling growth.  Thorough 
cultivation of the soil is the best preventive. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
No concerns at this time. 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
There are no recommended cultivars or selected materials 
at this time.  Crooked stem aster is available from 
commercial nurseries specializing in native plants.   

 

 
Prepared By:  
Samantha Kirk, (Horticultural Volunteer) 
Shawn Belt, NRCS, National Plant Materials Center, 
Beltsville, MD 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Shawn Belt, NRCS, National Plant Materials Center, 
Beltsville, MD 

Published: March 2009 
 
Edited: 07-Nov-2008 SMK 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

