BLACK WILLOW 
SALIX NIGRA Marsh. 

Plant Symbol = SANI 

 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Manhattan, Kansas & Kansas State University, Forestry 
Research 

 

Photo Courtesy of Philip Barbour, Wildlife Biologist, USDA NRCS, 
Madison, Mississippi 
 
Alternate Names 
American, Brittle, Champlain, Dudley, Gooding, gulf 
black, puzzle, rough American, scythe-leaf, scythe-
leaved, southwestern black, swamp, tall black, Texas 
black, and western black willow; sauce, saule, saule noir, 
sauz, swamp walnut, weide, wilg, willow, and willow 
catkins 
  
The name willow derives from the Old English wilwe.  
The botanical name Salix was the name given by the 
ancient Romans. 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: The ancient Greeks knew the therapeutic 
values of willow.  Tea made from willow bark was used 
for stiff joints and rheumatic pains.  
By the 1840’s, chemists had isolated salicylic acid from 
willow and found it produced marked antipyretic (fever-
reducing) and analgesic (pain-killing) effects and 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

“striking relief of acute articular rheumatism.”  Modern 
aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid) is a synthetic product.  
Salicylic acid got its name from Salix. 
 
Industry: Most black willow lumber is used for shipping 
boxes.  
 
Wildlife: The willows are among the first plants to 
provide honey bees, after long winters, with nectar and 
pollen.  Domestic grazing animals browse in willow 
thickets.  Elk and beaver browse on willow leaves in the 
summer and willow twigs in the winter.   
 
Ornamental: Black willow can be planted as an 
ornamental where a fine-textured shade tree is desired.  It 
will tolerate dry soils with reduced vigor. 
 
Conservation:  One of the greatest services of the willows 
is as a soil-binder.  Growing along the banks of countless 
streams, their fibrous roots help to prevent the soil from 
being washed away.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values. 
 
Description and Adaptation 
A member of the Willow Family (Salicaceae), black 
willow is a small to medium-sized tree 30 to 60 ft high 
and about 14 inches in diameter with a broad, irregular 
crown and a superficial root system.  
 
Leaves are simple, alternate, deciduous, narrow, lance-
shaped, with tapered bases, rounded base, finely toothed 
margin, blade yellow-green on both sides, with a few 
small hairs on the lower surface; petiole slender.  Flowers 
of black willow: male and female catkins on separate 
trees. Catkins are 4-5 cm long, on ends of leafy shoots, 
many small, yellow-green flowers without petals.  Twigs 
are light-red, slender, and flexible.  Buds narrow, conical, 
orange-brown; leaf scars narrow, crescent shaped; broad, 
flat, often shaggy ridges; pith pale brown, small.  The 
bark is dark gray-brown to nearly blackish, divided into 
deep fissures separating thick, interlacing, sometimes 
scaly ridges. 
 
Black willow is adapted wherever ample soil moisture is 
found.  Black willow grows best where the average 
annual rainfall is 51 inches, of which 20 inches falls 
during the growing season, April through August.   

 
 

 

Fire Effects 
Black willow is very susceptible to fire.  Hot fires can kill 
entire stands of willows.  Black willow will sprout at the 
base following fire.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) ‘Webb’ compact willow is a “strikingly 
different vase-shaped form of black willow.”  This 
unusual form was found by Mr. Charles Webb in Madison 
County, Florida.  
 
Control  
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use it safely.  Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method. USDA, 
NRCS does not guarantee or warranty the products and 
control methods named, and other products may be 
equally effective. 
 
Prepared By 
John M. Row 
USDA NRCS, Manhattan Plant Materials Center, 
Manhattan, Kansas 66502 
 
Wayne A. Geyer 
Forestry Division, Kansas State University, Manhattan, 
Kansas 66506 

Published:  May, 2010 

Edited: For more information about this and other plants, 
please contact your local NRCS field office or 
Conservation District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and 
visit the PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or 
the Plant Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

 

The estimated life span for black willow averages 65 
years with a range of 40 to 100 years. 
 
Wood characteristics: The wood is of moderately light to 
light density, moderately soft.  It does not splinter easily, 
which makes excellent wood for toys, crates, and barn 
floors.   
 
Distribution:  Black willow ranges from New Brunswick 
to Manitoba, south to Florida and Texas. 
 

 

Black willow distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database. 
 
Habitat:  This species is usually found on moist or wet 
soils along banks of streams, lakes, swamps around farm 
ponds, and pasture sloughs.   
 
Establishment  
Black willow is easily established from cuttings.  
Stringent requirements of seed germination and seedling 
establishment limit black willow to wet soils. 
 
Management 
Stands of black willow can stagnate if not periodically 
thinned.   
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
A number of insect species attack black willow but few 
cause serious damage, such as, forest tent caterpillar, 
cotton wood leaf beetle, willow sawfly, stem borers, and 
twig borers. 
 
Seeds and Plant Production  
Good seed crops occur almost every year with only a few 
interspersed poor crop years. The seeds are widely 
disseminated by wind and water.  Willow seed must be 
collected as soon as it ripens and sown immediately.  
Stem cuttings are highly desirable to propagate trees.  
 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 
 
 
 

 

