   

       Plant Fact Sheet  

  

 

The ligule has short membrane and densely hairy.  
The stem is thick, round and often 3/4 inch in 
diameter at base.  The seedhead has 20 to 40 spikes, 
each about 3 inches long, and spikelets about 1/2 inch 
long growing on one side of rachis with the seedhead 
growing 12 to 18 inches long. 
 
Management 
For best production and plant vigor, graze big 
cordgrass during fall and winter and defer grazing 
during summer. 
 
Establishment 
Major growth is from late March through September 
or October.  Seedheads form during fall.  The base of 
the plant remains green through the winter.  It 
reproduces from robust rhizomes, which form dense 
colonies.  This plant is primarily adapted to mineral 
soils in salt marshes.  It tolerates moderate salinity 
and water levels that fluctuate from 4 inches below 
soil surface to 2 inches above.  It is closely associated 
with marsh-hay cordgrass (Spartina patens) and 
common reed (Phragmites australis). 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin)  
Please contact your local NRCS Field Office. 
 
Reference 
Leithead, H.L., L.L. Yarlett, & T.N. Shiflett. 1976. 
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states. 
USDA SCS Agriculture Handbook No. 389, 
Washington, DC. 
 
Prepared By & Species Coordinator: 
Percy Magee  
USDA NRCS National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 
 
Edited: 13may02 ahv; jul03 ahv; 20sep05 jsp 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

BIG CORDGRASS 
Spartina cynosuroides (L.) 

Roth 

Plant symbol = SPCY 

 
Contributed By: USDA NRCS National Plant Data 
Center 

 

© Larry Allain 
@ plants.usda.gov 

Alternate Names 
Salt reedgrass 
 
Uses 
Cattle graze big cordgrass.  Ducks and geese eat the 
tender shoots that grow after marshes are burned in 
early fall. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status, such as, state noxious status and 
wetland indicator values. 
 
Description 
Grass Family (Poaceae).  Big cordgrass is a 
warm-season, robust, rhizomatous perennial.  The 
height ranges from 3 to 10 feet.  The leaf blade is flat 
and 1/2 to 1 inch wide; often 18 to 24 inches long; 
rough and sharp margin.  The leaf sheath is rounded.  

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation District, and visit the PLANTS 
<http://plants.usda.gov> and Plant Materials Program Web sites <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov>. 

The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national 
origin, gender, religion, age, disability, political beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all 
programs.) Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, 
etc.) should contact USDA’s TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD).  

To file a complaint of discrimination, write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, Room 326W, Whitten Building, 14th and Independence 
Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call (202) 720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer. 

 

 

 

