PACIFIC ASTER 

Symphyotrichum chilense (Nees) 

G.L. Nesom 

Plant Symbol = SYCH4 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials 
Center, Oregon 

Photo by Annie Young-Mathews, NRCS, 2010 

 

Alternate Names 
Previously known as Aster chilensis Nees, the currently 
accepted name is Symphyotrichum chilense.  Other 
common names include coast aster, Pacific American-
aster, and common California aster.  When it was named 
it was mistakenly thought to occur in Chile, but in fact is 
limited to North America.  There are currently three 
recognized varieties of Pacific aster: S. chilense var. 
chilense, var. invenustum, and var. medium.  

Uses 
Pacific aster can be used in wildlife or pollinator 
enhancement plantings, native prairie restoration, 
meadow gardens, and erosion control or critical area 
plantings.  Its deep, extensive, fibrous root system can 
help stabilize slopes.  
Native aster species (including Symphyotrichum spp.) are 
good late-season pollinator plants, providing a critical 
pollen source for bees active in the late fall, including 
new bumble bee queens building up their energy reserves 
before winter dormancy.  They also serve as nectar 
sources and host plants for checkerspot and crescent 
butterflies. 

 
 

 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

Status 
Pacific aster is considered a facultative plant within its 
native range, meaning it is equally likely to occur in 
wetlands or non-wetlands.  Please consult the PLANTS 
Web site and your State Department of Natural Resources 
for this plant’s current status (e.g., threatened or 
endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland 
indicator values). 

Description and Adaptation 
Pacific aster is a common, native, rhizomatous, 
herbaceous perennial that grows 1 to 4 ft tall.  Plants can 
be clumped or spreading, with one to many ascending or 
erect stems that are hairy towards the tips.  Basal leaves 
are usually hairless, stalked, thin (generally 1 to 8 inches 
long by 0.2 to 1.5 inches wide), and wither by the time the 
plant flowers.  Leaves along the stems are arranged 
alternately, stalkless, and are 1 to 3.5 inches long by 0.2 
to 1.2 inches wide.  Flower heads are arranged in open, 
flat-top or round-top, branched clusters (cymes), with 
violet to pink or white ray flowers (petal-like outer part of 
the aster flower) and yellow disk flowers (centers).  
Bloom time varies by latitude and elevation, but can 
extend from June to October.    

 

Pacific aster distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database. 

Pacific aster grows in a variety of habitats including 
grasslands, meadows, salt marshes, coastal dunes and 
bluffs, coastal scrub, and open or disturbed areas.  It is 
adapted to fine- to medium-textured soils, full sun to 
partial shade, is relatively drought tolerant, and has a high 
salinity tolerance.  Pacific aster is distributed in coastal 
regions from southwest British Columbia to Southern 
California at elevations below 1600 ft.  For updated 

 

distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site. 

Establishment 
Pacific aster does not possess seed dormancy, so 
untreated seed can be sown any time of year, but will 
generally germinate in the spring when soils are moist and 
temperatures reach 60°F.  Standard site preparation 
should include treatment and/or removal of weeds for one 
to two years prior to seeding, and preparation of a clean, 
firm seed bed.  Typical seeding rates for pollinator 
enhancement or restoration plantings are 1 to 2 pounds 
per acre for a single species planting, but would be 
substantially less as part of a mix.  There are 800,000 to 
1,300,000 seeds per pound.   

Plants are also easily established from transplanted plugs 
in the fall or spring.  If seed is not available, plants can be 
propagated from divisions of the rhizome or root crown in 
early spring, but this method is time consuming and 
generally not preferable if other methods are available.  

Photo by Amy Bartow, NRCS, 2010 

 

Management 
Pacific aster generally does not require watering, 
fertilization, or other management once established.  
Plants can be cut or mowed to ground level in the late fall 
or winter following the first hard frost and will re-sprout 
in the spring. 

Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no known pests or problems associated with 
Pacific aster. 

Environmental Concerns 
Under optimal conditions (full sun and moist, well-
drained soil), Pacific aster can develop long, vigorous 
rhizomes that allow the plants to spread into thick clumps 
that may outcompete weaker neighboring plants.  Plants 
also produce prolific amounts of wind-born seed that can 
spread and establish in neighboring areas.  Once 
established, Pacific aster plants can be difficult to 
completely remove from an area. 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
There are no developed cultivars of Pacific aster, but 
container plants and seed of local ecotypes are readily 
available from commercial sources throughout the west. 

Prepared By  
Annie Young-Mathews, Corvallis Plant Materials Center, 
Oregon 

Citation 
Young-Mathews, A. 2012. Plant fact sheet for Pacific 
aster (Symphyotrichum chilense). USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Corvallis Plant 
Materials Center, Corvallis, OR. 

Published February 2012 

Edited: 22Nov2011 dcd; 28Nov2011 ab; 22Dec2011 jab; 18Jan2012 gm 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

