ROSE SPIREA 
Spiraea douglasii Hook 

Plant Symbol = SPDO 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, Oregon 

 

Photo by Dale Darris  
 
Alternate names  
There are two botanical varieties, var. douglasii and var. 
menziesii, with the latter referred to as Menzies’ spirea. 
Other common names include Douglas spirea, Western 
spirea, hardhack, steeplebush, meadowsweet, and pink 
spirea.  
  
Uses  
Rose spirea is useful for stabilization of stream-banks and 
shorelines as well as the restoration of wetlands including 
marshes, bogs, and open swamps. Limbs are suitable for 
branch packing, fascines, and other soil bioengineering 
practices.  In some cases this species should be planted 
sparingly at best because of its ability to spread and 
dominate favorable sites. Rose spirea withstands 
competition from wetland grasses better than certain other 
woody species.  If not severely shaded when young, it 
may also compete well with exotic reed canarygrass.  
  
Rose spirea provides good cover for birds and small 
mammals. Grouse apparently eat the dried spikes and 
other wildlife consume the seed filled capsules.  The 
flowers are a source of nectar for hummingbirds, 
butterflies, and other pollinator insects.  Although 
occasionally browsed by deer and livestock, it is 
considered poor forage and little mention is made 
concerning its nutritional value and palatability. Native 
Americans made minor use of this plant. At least one tribe 
used the seeds to make a tea for the treatment of diarrhea. 
The branches were used to spread and cook salmon, hang 
salmon for drying and smoking, and make brooms.  With 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

its attractive and fragrant flower clusters, rose spirea is 
used for naturalistic landscaping, ponds, hedges, and 
screens. The canes and dry flower heads provide visual 
interest in winter.  
  
Description  
Rose spirea is a deciduous shrub in the Rose family that 
grows 2 to 7 ft tall, has upright slender limbs, and spreads 
by suckers (under-ground shoots) to form dense thickets. 
The leaves are oblong to elliptical in shape, 1 to 3 in. 
long, lighter and sometimes wooly beneath, and toothed 
along the upper half of the margins. Tiny, fragrant reddish 
pink flowers are borne in dense, elongate clusters at the 
end of shoots. The clusters appear ‘fuzzy’ from the 
abundance of long stamens. Flowering occurs from June 
to September. The fruit is a smooth, dry follicle that 
persists in winter. This species hybridizes in the wild with 
white spirea (Spiraea betulifolia).  
  
Status  
Please consult the Plants Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status, such as state noxious and wetland indicator values.  
  
Adaptation  
Rose spirea grows best in full sun to dappled shade and in 
a wide range of soils (gravelly sandy loams to heavy 
clays) that range from acidic to neutral (pH 4.5-7.5) and 
from moist well drained to wet and poorly drained 
(hydric). The species tolerates extended periods of 
flooding and perpetually water-logged soils. Only the 
most severe fires will eliminate regrowth from basal 
portions and suckers.  
  
Distribution- Rose spirea occurs naturally from southern 
Alaska south to northern California and east to western 
Montana. The elevation range is sea-level to 6,500 ft in 
the mountains.  Habitat includes damp meadows, riparian 
zones, bogs, marshes, open swamps, and the margins of 
ponds and lakes. It is a member of many willow, alder, 
freshwater marsh, moist coniferous forest, scrub shrub 
and semi-aquatic plant communities. 
 
Limitations or environmental concerns  
Rose spirea may be susceptible to fire blight disease 
which causes dieback of tips and scorched looking leaves.  
It is host to several insect pests including aphids, leaf 
rollers, and scales. This species can become invasive, as it 
spreads readily by suckers and seedlings, especially on 
flat, moist to wet sites in full sun.  Dense thickets can 
become nearly impenetrable and too competitive for other 
desirable plant species.  It may not be suitable for small 
areas without regular management.  The species is a mild 

 
 

 

Until more is known about the genetic variation of this 
species in relation to the environment, material 
originating from the same region, same elevation band 
(low, mid, high), and similar habitat should be favored for 
revegetation.  
  
Prepared by  
Dale Darris and Pete Gonzalves, USDA NRCS Plant 
Materials Center, Corvallis, Oregon.  
  
Species coordinator  
Dale Darris, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, Oregon.  

Published September, 2009 

Edited:  

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

allergen. Some authorities list it as nonpoisonous. Others 
describe it as poisonous, possibly because spireas in 
general are known to contain aspirin like compounds 
which in concentrated form are toxic if taken internally.  
 

 

   

Reprinted with permission, Univ. of WA Press  
  
Establishment  
Rose spirea is readily propagated by softwood, semi-
hardwood, and dormant hardwood cuttings, layering, 
rhizome and root segments (in spring), division, and seed. 
With spring cuttings, some suggest making a slice cut at 
the basal end, soaking in water for several weeks in a 
cooler, and dipping in a rooting hormone (1000 ppm IBA-
talc or solution) before planting into a light rooting 
medium. Mist benches and bottom heat may also improve 
rooting. If installed properly in fall or winter, a fair 
percentage of untreated hardwood cuttings (18 in or 
longer) can root and establish directly on suitable, moist 
revegetation sites.  As with rooted stock, mulch, first year 
irrigation, and weed suppression are beneficial for 
establishment in the nursery and field.     
Seed is collected in fall when the fruits turn dry and 
brown and then extracted from the capsules by shaking or 
tumbling.  Store the seed under cool dry 
conditions.Germination occurs quickly without seed 
treatment if little drying has occurred prior to sowing.  
Otherwise, the seed may require 1 to 3 months of 
prechilling (moist cold stratification at 33 to 38°F) or fall 
sowing to break dormancy over winter.   
  
Improved cultivars and selected materials (and area of 
origin)  
For streambank stabilization and rehabilitation of 
wetlands at low elevation in western Oregon and 
Washington, the NRCS Plant Materials Center, Corvallis, 
OR, and the Agricultural Experiment Stations of Oregon 
and Washington released ‘Bashaw’ Douglas spirea.  
Clonally propagated, it originated from a stand in 
Snohomish Co., WA. 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 
 
 
 

 

