 

 

 

 

  Plant Fact Sheet

MEADOW 

CHECKERBLOOM 
Sidalcea campestris Greene 

Plant Symbol = SICA2 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials 
Center, Oregon 

Photo by Amy Bartow, NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials Center, 2009 

 

Alternative Names 
Alternate Common Names: meadow checker-mallow, tall 
wild hollyhock, tall wild checkermallow 
Alternate Scientific Names: Sidalcea sylvestris A. Nelson 

Uses 
Pollinator habitat: Meadow checkerbloom attracts a wide 
array of native bees, wasps, flies, beetles, and butterflies.  
The flowers are a high-quality nectar source for the 
Oregon endangered Fender’s blue butterfly (Plebejus 
icarioides fenderi), and a possible butterfly host plant for 
the West Coast lady (Vanessa annabella), common 
checkered skipper (Pyrgus communis), painted lady 
(Vanessa cardui), gray hairstreak (Strymon melinus), and 
American lady (Vanessa virginiensis).  There is also a 
species of native bee (Diadasia nigrifrons) that is a 
specialist on the three Sidalcea species in the Willamette 
Valley, so this bee’s survival is closely linked to the 
presence of its rare host/forage species. 
Ornamental: This plant makes a tall, showy addition to a 
butterfly meadow or wildflower garden.  It can be used 
along bed borders, fences, driveways, roadsides, and 
hedgerow edges. 

Status 
Sidalcea campestris is listed as a Candidate species by the 
State of Oregon and is on the Oregon Natural Heritage 
Program List 4 (of conservation concern but not currently 
threatened or endangered).  Please consult the PLANTS 
Web site and your State Department of Natural Resources 
for this plant’s current status (e.g., threatened or 
endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland 
indicator values). 

Description and Adaptation 
Meadow checkerbloom is an uncommon, native, 
herbaceous perennial wildflower in the mallow family 
(Malvaceae).  A clump of stout, upright, hairy, hollow, 
branched stems originates from a thick taproot or short 
rhizome and grows 1½ to 6 ft tall.  The gray-green, 
alternate leaves have hairy stems 4 to 8 inches long and 
are 2 to 6 inches broad and deeply palmately divided into 
7 to 9 thin, hairy, toothed lobes with sharply pointed tips.  
The white to pale-pink, cup-shaped flowers have five 
petals that are about ¾ inch long.  The flowers are borne 
on short stalks, arranged in a simple or somewhat 
branched, elongated, open inflorescence, and mature from 
the bottom upward.  There are both bisexual and female 
plants; the female flowers are smaller and lack anthers 
(see photo below).   

 
Meadow checkerbloom flowering stalks: bisexual flowers on the left and 
female flowers on the right. Photo by Steven Gisler, June 2001. 

 

Flowering period is from June to August.  The fruit is a 
schizocarp which contains 7 to 9 single-seeded, beaked 
carpels about 1/8 inch long that form a ring, like the 
segments of an orange, and separate at maturity to fall 
from the parent plant. 
Meadow checkerbloom grows in meadows and prairies, 
as well as along roadsides and the edges of woodlands, 
wetlands and riparian areas.  Its native distribution 
extends throughout the Willamette Valley of Oregon at 
elevations below 700 ft.  It was introduced, probably as a 
garden plant, to the Seattle, Washington area, but it rarely 
persists there.  For updated distribution, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 

 

Meadow checkerbloom distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS 
Database. 
Establishment and Seed Production 
Meadow checkerbloom can be established with moderate 
ease by direct seeding, transplanting plugs, or from 
divisions.  The seeds exhibit some physical dormancy so 
germination rates are improved by lightly scarifying the 
seed coat with sandpaper prior to sowing; seedlings 
generally emerge within two weeks.  Seed can be 
broadcast at a rate of 4 pounds per acre or drilled no 
deeper than ¼ inch at a rate of 2 pounds per acre for 
single species plantings.  There are approximately 
100,000 seeds per pound, so a seeding rate of one pound 
pure live seed per acre results in about 2 live seeds per 
square foot.  For prairie restoration or pollinator plantings, 
plugs should be planted on 3-foot centers in clumps 
resulting in a total of about 4,840 plants per acre.   
For seed production, fields are generally established from 
transplanted plugs, and seed can be harvested the first 
year.  Large fields can be direct combined, while small 
fields are generally swathed and the material is collected 
to dry on tarps before cleaning.     
Management 
Most remaining populations of meadow checkerbloom 
exist along roadsides or fences, so spray programs are a 
threat to the survival of this species in the wild.  Other 

 

threats to remnant populations include habitat loss to 
agricultural and urban development, displacement by 
invasive weeds, and encroachment by trees and shrubs. 

 

Remnant population of meadow checkerbloom along a fencerow in Linn 
County, OR. Photo by Steven Gisler, June 2001. 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Seed weevils can cause significant pre-dispersal damage 
to seeds, reducing seed yields or preventing natural 
reseeding, but predators can be significantly reduced 
through the use of a synthetic pyrethroid insecticide 
applied early in the flowering season.  Please contact your 
local agricultural extension specialist or county weed 
specialist to learn what works best in your area and how 
to use it safely.  Always read label and safety instructions 
for each control method.  Trade names and control 
measures appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, and 
other products may be equally effective. 
Environmental Concerns 
No environmental concerns are known at this time. 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
None, but seed is sometimes available from commercial 
sources in the Pacific Northwest. 
Prepared By 
Annie Young-Mathews, Conservation Agronomist  
USDA-NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials Center, Oregon  
Citation 
Young-Mathews, A. 2012. Plant fact sheet for meadow 
checkerbloom (Sidalcea campestris). USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, OR. 
Published June 2012 
Edited: 12Jan2012 dcd; 12Jan2012 klp; 13Jan2012 ab; 17Apr2012 jab 
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

