SPIKE DROPSEED  
Sporobolus contractus Hitchc.  

Plant Symbol = SPCO4 

 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS James E. “Bud” Smith 
Plant Materials Center, Knox City, Texas  

 

USDA/NRCS   
 
Uses  
Erosion Control:  Spike dropseed may be used as a 
component of a seeding mixture for critical area plantings 
and conservation cover.  It is a bunchgrass with very thick 
vegetation near the soil surface which can be used to 
stabilize sandy eroding soils.  
  
Wildlife:  Spike dropseed is utilized as a food source by 
various wildlife species.  Particularly, upland birds feed 
on the mature seed that is produced.  It also provides good 
cover for birds and small mammals.  
  
Livestock:  Many species of livestock will graze on spike 
dropseed.  It has a nutritional value of fair. The species 
has the ability to recover and reseed itself if heavy grazing 
occurs.  
  
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site 
(http://plants.usda.gov) and your State Department of 
Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g. 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).  
  
Weediness   
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation 
if not properly managed.  Please consult your local NRCS 
Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service office, state 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

natural resource, or state agriculture department regarding 
its status and use.  Weed information is also available 
from the PLANTS Web site at 
.  Please consult this and 
http://www.plants.usda.gov
Related Web Sites and view the plant profile for this 
species for further information.  
  
Description   
Spike dropseed is a native, perennial, warm season 
bunchgrass with erect stems that grow 3 feet tall.  It 
begins growing in the spring when moisture levels 
increase and matures to produce seed in October.  The 
leaf blades grow to about 1.5 feet long and ½ inch wide.  
The leaves are flat when the plant is actively growing, but 
as the plant begins to dry, they become V-shaped.  The 
sheaths of the leaves are hairy along the margins.  The 
seedhead is ½ inch wide and six inches to approximately 
1.5 feet long.    
  
Adaptation  
Spike dropseed is adapted to a large portion of the 
southwest United States.  It is found from Texas to 
California, and as far north as Nevada and Colorado.  
Spike dropseed is adapted to a wide range of soil types, 
but performs best on loamy fine, silty and sandy loam 
soils.  
  
Distribution: Please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site.  
  
Establishment  
Spike dropseed should be planted on a clean, firm 
seedbed.  Planting can be done using either a grass drill or 
broadcast seeding, but grass drills are the most successful 
method of planting.  Seed should be placed less than 1/8 
inch deep on fine textured and  ½ inch on sandy soils.  
Spike dropseed should be planted at a rate of 1.0 lb pure 
live seed (pls) per acre. When planting spike dropseed as 
a component of a seed mixture, the seeding rate should be 
adjusted to the desired percent of the mix. Soil samples 
should be taken before planting to determine the amount 
of fertilizer needed to bring the fertility level up to a 
medium range.  Nitrogen should be limited to less than 
ten pounds per acre until a stand is evident.    
  
Management  
Spike dropseed is commonly found as a component in 
seed mixtures for range and pastures.  Stands of spike 
dropseed should be well established before livestock 
grazing is permitted.  Once the stand is established, spike 
dropseed should never be grazed or cut below five to six 
inches.  Grazing can begin the first winter after planting 
on well established areas.  Spike dropseed can reseed 

 
 

 

Prepared By:   
Brandon Carr, USDA NRCS James E. “Bud” Smith Plant 
Materials Center, Knox City, Texas  
  
Species Coordinator: 
  
Published:  November, 2009 

Edited:  

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

itself following overgrazing or drought; however, proper 
management is required to ensure the plant is not 
overgrazed or over utilized by livestock or wildlife.  
Consult your local NRCS Field Office for assistance with 
planning and applying prescribed grazing. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems  
None Known  
  
Control   
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use it safely.  Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method.  Trade names 
and control measures appear in this document only to 
provide specific information.  USDA NRCS does not 
guarantee or warranty the products and control methods 
named, and other products may be equally effective.  
  
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
Potter County germplasm was released from the James E. 
“Bud” Smith Plant Materials Center, Knox City, TX in 
2000.  It was collected originally in 1984 from native 
plants in the Canadian River bottomland in Potter County, 
TX, approximately 18 miles north of Amarillo, TX.  
  
Cochise Germplasm was released from the Tucson Plant 
Materials Center in Tucson, AZ in 2005.  Uses include 
revegetation of denuded range sites, abandoned cropland, 
and critical areas.  
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

