AROMATIC ASTER 

Symphyotrichum oblongifolium 

(Nutt.) G.L. Nesom 
Plant Symbol = SYOB 

 
Contributed by: USDA, NRCS, National Plant Materials 
Center, Beltsville, MD  

 

 

Clarence A. Rechenthin @ USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database 
 
Alternate Names 
Aromatic American aster 
Fall aster 
Wild blue aster 
Shale barren aster 
Aster oblongifolius L.  
 
Uses 
Conservation:  Aromatic aster is an adaptable, easy to 
grow ground cover for dry, sunny locations.  It is a native 
plant and can be part of a good wildlife seed mixture 
where native grasses and wildflowers are seeded together.  
Ethno botanical: A tea made from the roots of Asters has 
been used to treat fevers. 
Landscaping and wildlife: Aromatic aster creates showy 
mounds of blooms in fall and is excellent for native 
landscape gardens.  Asters will grow on disturbed sites 
and can be used for wildlife habitat restoration.  Aromatic 
aster is attractive to pollinators including: long-tongued 
bees, short-tongued bees, small to medium-sized 
butterflies and skippers.  Many kinds of insects feed on 
the foliage and other parts of asters, including the 
caterpillars of the butterfly Chlosyne nycteis (Silvery 
Checkerspot) and many moth species.  Wild Turkey and 
other upland game birds eat the seeds and foliage to a 
limited extent.  Mammalian herbivores occasionally eat 
the foliage of asters, even though their food value is low.   

 

Plant Fact Sheet

 

Status 
Aromatic aster is listed as rare in Indiana and as 
threatened in Ohio.  Please consult the PLANTS Web site 
and your State Department of Natural Resources for this 
plant’s current status (e.g. threatened or endangered 
species, state noxious status, and wetland indicator 
values). 
 
Description and Adaptation  
Aromatic aster is a native perennial wildflower that grows 
from 1–3 feet tall.  The aster’s rigid stems branch out 
from the base and give off a balsam-like scent when 
crushed.  The oblong leaves are .5–3 inches long, simple 
(not made up of multiple leaflets), and alternate 
(progressing singly up the stem).  The flowers are 
composite with purple ray flowers along their edges and 
yellow disk flowers within the center. Ray flowers usually 
have a petal which radiates outward from the composite 
flower's center.  There are approximately 30 purple or 
violet ray florets per flower.  The bracts (a modified leaf 
that arises from the stem at the point where the flower or 
flower cluster develops) are glandular with long, green, 
loose or spreading tips.   Flowers appear in fall 
(September-November) and give way to flat, hairy 
achenes (dry fruits).  Aromatic aster spreads by stolons 
(horizontal stems that produce new plants from buds). 
 
Distribution: Aromatic aster grows in well-drained moist 
to dry soils in full sun to partial shade.  It is widely 
distributed from New York west to Montana and south to 
North Carolina and Texas (USDA plant cold hardiness 
zones 4 – 7).  For current distribution, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
Habitat:  Aromatic aster is very adaptable as it grows in 
rocky and sandy soils such as those found in prairies and 
bluffs as well as in moist woodland habitats. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 

Establishment 
Seed propagation 
Seeds can be collected from wild plants in late fall when 
the achenes (dry fruits) separate easily from the 
receptacle. Seeds should be collected in paper bags and 
allowed to dry for 1–2 weeks.  If seeds are sown directly, 
sow them five-eighths of an inch deep in the fall and sow 
thickly.  Plant a cover crop of a cool-season annual grass 
over the seedbed to protect seed over the winter.  If seeds 
are to be propagated in a container, they should be stored 
for 1–3 months at 30–40 degrees Fahrenheit before 
sowing.  Many species of Aster benefit from moisture 
during the cold storage (stratification) period.  Use a 
perlite/vermiculite mix for stratification.  The seed will 
germinate in 10 to 15 days at 72 degrees Fahrenheit.  
Germination to true leaf stage is 7 to 15 days.  Seedlings 
should be thinned at this stage. 
 
Vegetative propagation 
Propagate by softwood cuttings taken in late spring or by 
divisions taken in the spring or autumn. 
 
Management 
Aromatic aster colonizes by stolons, it needs regular 
thinning to control its spread.  Aromatic aster may open 
up if it becomes too top-heavy, so prune it back by no 
more than half in mid-June to keep it thick.  Cut it back to 
the basal rosette (round level ring of leaves at the plants 
base) after it goes dormant in late fall or early winter.  It 
can be transplanted in the spring or autumn.  Aromatic 
aster prefers neutral to slightly acidic soils. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Aromatic Aster is susceptible to many leaf spots, rusts, 
and mildews which will affect the lower leaves but 
usually do no permanent damage.  The most destructive 
diseases in the cultivation of asters are various forms of 
stem-rot.  They are of fungal origin and are induced by 
allowing the plants to remain moist for an extended 
period of time.  The infection usually takes place in the 
seed-row, but often no effect is noticed until the plants are 
nearly full-grown, when they suddenly wilt and die.  The 
“yellow disease” causes the plants to have a bleached 
appearance and to make a spindling growth.  Thorough 
cultivation of the soil is the best preventive.   
 
Environmental Concerns 
No concerns at this time. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
There are no recommended cultivars or selected materials 
at this time.  Aromatic aster may be available from 
commercial nurseries specializing in native plants. 

 

 
Prepared By:  
Samantha Kirk (Horticultural Volunteer) and 
Shawn Belt, NRCS, National Plant Materials Center, 
Beltsville, MD 
 
Species Coordinator:  
Shawn Belt, NRCS, National Plant Materials Center, 
Beltsville, MD 

Published January 2009] 
 
Edited: 07-Nov-2008 SMK 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov>. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

