 

 

 

 

  Plant Fact Sheet

CANADA 

GOLDENROD 
Solidago canadensis L. 

Plant Symbol = SOCA6 

 
Contributed by:  NRCS Plant Materials Center, Pullman, 
WA 

Forage:  This plant is grazed by cattle, sheep, horses, and 
whitetail deer.   
 
Ethnobotanical:  The Iroquois, Okanagan-Colville, 
Potowatomi, Shuswap, Zuni, Gosiute and Navajo utilized 
Canada goldenrod for various medical purposes.  
 
Ornamental: Canada goldenrod is not typically planted in 
a landscaped setting due to its spreading rhizomatous 
growth.  However, it is possible to manage plants by 
planting in a pot submersed in the ground, or by removing 
new growth each year.  Seed dispersal can be controlled 
by removing flower heads prior to seed ripening. 
 
Status 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State Department 
of Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
Goldenrods have a reputation of being weedy due to their 
aggressive rhizomatous growth.  However, in stable 
rangeland environments they seldom achieve densities 
that are problematic.  Please consult with your local 
NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service 
office, state natural resource, or state agriculture 
department regarding this plant’s status and management.   

Description and Adaptation 
General:  Sunflower family (Asteraceae).  Solidago 
canadensis is a native, warm-season, long-lived perennial 
that spreads by rhizomes and forms large, dense patches.  
Stems are mostly smooth, covered with fine hairs at the 
top and are 1 to 7 ft tall.  Leaves are sharply toothed, 
lance-shaped, covered with fine hairs, triple-nerved and 2 
to 5 inches long.  Flower panicles occur at the end of each 
stem, and when open, are 10 inches wide.  Inflorescences 
occur mostly on one side of long, drooping panicle 
branches, have 10 to 17 ray flowers, and bloom July 
through October.  Pollination typically occurs by the aid 
of insects. Seeds are small and dry with sparse hairs and 
numerous pale bristles at the tip. 
 
Solidago canadensis can be distinguished from S. 
missouriensis by its taller stature and its larger, more 
branched, open flower panicles.  S. canadensis can be 
distinguished from S. giganteus by its hairs on the stems 
and yellow bracts.  
 
Canada goldenrod is adapted to areas receiving full sun or 
part shade and 16 to 60 in of annual precipitation.  Plants 
typically grow in moist soil with medium texture and 
moderate levels of organic matter.  They are found in 

 

 
Solidago canadensis. www.discoverlife.org 
 
Alternate Names 
Canadian goldenrod, meadow goldenrod, common 
goldenrod, giant goldenrod, tall goldenrod, shorthair 
goldenrod (S. canadensis var. gilvocanescens), Hager’s 
goldenrod (S. canadensis var. hargeri), rough goldenrod 
(S. canadensis var. salebrosa). 
 
Uses 
Pollinator habitat: Solidago species provide vital sources 
of pollen and nectar for bees and other insects in the late 
summer and fall throughout North America. 
 
Rangeland revegetation: Canada goldenrod can be used 
for revegetation of disturbed areas, for mine spoil 
reclamation, and soil stabilization. 
 

 

 

damp meadows, waterways, and ditches along roadsides 
and railroads.  They may also inhabit dry, open slopes in 
upland prairies, and deciduous and evergreen forests.  
Plants are not found on waterlogged sites and only rarely 
found on very dry sites. 

Canada goldenrod grows in all US states except HI, LA, 
AL, GA, SC and FL, and all Canadian provinces except 
Nunavut.  The plant has five varieties (ecotypes):  var. 
canadensis (Canada goldenrod), var. gilvocanescens 
(shorthair goldenrod), var. hargeri (Harger’s goldenrod), 
var. lepida (Canada goldenrod), and var. salebrosa (rough 
goldenrod).  For current distribution of this species and 
varieties, consult the Plant Profile page on the PLANTS 
Web site. 
 

Management 
This plant spreads by rhizomes and by seed.  Where plant 
spread is not desired, seedlings should be planted in a 
large pot or barrel submersed in the soil, or new growth 
should be cut and removed each year.  To prevent seed 
dispersal, flower heads should be removed prior to seed 
ripening.  Plants will withstand vigorous cutting, and will 
regrow if cut during the growing season.  

Pests and Potential Problems 
Solidago canadensis is susceptible to many pathogens and 
insect pests, which may reduce seed production.   

Environmental Concerns 
This plant may form dense stands in some habitats, 
particularly where ground is open and disturbed.  To 
prevent dense stands from forming, seed Canada 
goldenrod at low densities or plant in small areas. 

Control 
If control of this species is desired, contact your local 
agricultural extension specialist or county weed specialist 
to learn what works best in your area and how to use it 
safely.  Always read label and safety instructions for any 
control method.   

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
None.  Seed and seedlings, however, are available from 
multiple vendors. 

Canada goldenrod distribution from the USDA PLANTS Database 

Establishment 
Plants can be established by seed, seedlings, or rhizomes.  
Seed should be planted into a firm, weed-free seed bed at 
a rate of 0.5 lb PLS/ac and at a depth of 0.125 to 0.25 
inches.  If planted in a mix, the seeding rate should be 
adjusted according to the proportion of the mix.  Seed is 
non-dormant, and can be planted in the fall or spring.   
 
Plants established by seedlings can be started by sowing 
seed in containers placed in a greenhouse in January.  
Seed should be covered lightly with soil and kept moist 
until germination.  A layer of pea gravel can be applied to 
the soil surface to prevent seeds from floating.  Plants 
should be moved to a cold-frame in late March or early 
April and hardened off for 2 to 4 weeks prior to 
transplanting into a prepared field site in early May.  
Plants should be spaced 1 to 2 ft apart. 
 
Plants can also be established by rhizomes.  Sections of 
rhizomes should be collected from cultivated plants or 
approved areas, kept moist during transport, and replanted 
in a prepared field site.   

 

Prepared By  
Pamela L.S. Pavek, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Pullman, Washington 

Citation 
Pavek, P.L.S. 2012. Plant fact sheet for Canada goldenrod 
(Solidago canadensis). USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service. Pullman, WA. 

Published June 2012 

Edited: 18May2012jab; 25June2012plsp 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

