POWDERY THALIA 

Thalia dealbata Fraser ex Roscoe 

Plant Symbol = THDE 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS Jamie L. Whitten Plant 
Materials Center, Coffeeville, MS 

 

Figure 1 Powdery thalia in flower. 
 
Alternate Names 
Other common names: powdery alligator-flag or water 
canna. 

Uses 
Powdery thalia is recommended for use in backyard 
ponds as an aquatic ornamental and constructed wetlands 
for home septic systems.  It may have some benefit as a 
waterfowl food because ducks will eat the seed.  

Status 
Powdery thalia is listed as endangered in Illinois.  This 
plant is considered an obligate wetland indicator species.  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Description and Adaptation 
Powdery thalia is a rhizomatous, herbaceous perennial 
with a bluish, glaucous coating on leaves, flower stalks, 
and flowers.

 

Plant Fact Sheet

The 3-4 foot tall leaves arise from the base of the plant 
with a stout petiole and a large, elongated leaf blade. The 
attractive purple to bluish flower clusters are produced at 
the top of a stalk extending 2-3 feet above the foliage. 
Each fruit consists of a bladdery, paper-like covering 
loosely surrounding a single seed. The seed are round to 
oval and dark brown speckled with tan when mature.  
Flowers are produced from late May to September with 
fruit maturing throughout the summer. There are about 
1275 seeds per pound.  Powdery thalia is usually found 
growing in wet ditches and along the margins of ponds on 
sites where the soil often contains a high level of organic 
matter. The nutrient loading capacity for sewage effluent 
has not been determined; however, powdery thalia will 
tolerate those levels normally found in a single residence 
septic system. It can tolerate water depths up to 1.5 feet 
during the growing season with deeper flooding tolerated 
during the dormant season.   The species occurs in the 
Coastal Plain from South Carolina to Texas and also in 
Oklahoma and Missouri.  
 

 

Powdery thalia distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database. 
 
For updated distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 

Establishment 
To ensure survival in a wetland site, vegetative 
propagules are required.  Planting can be done throughout 
the year in the southeastern states. Planting pieces should 
consist of a 4-6 inch section of rhizome with several 
growing points.  If the plants are actively growing, the 
shoots should not be cut shorter than 6-8 inches.  A two-
foot spacing will allow the plants to easily fill in the 
planting area in one growing season.

 
 

 

The planting hole should allow for the length of the 
rhizome and should be deep enough for one inch of soil to 
cover the top of the rhizome. Water levels should be kept 
at about 1-2 inches until the plants become established 
and should never be allowed to cover the entire shoot of 
non-dormant plants.  In a constructed wetland, sewage 
effluent should not be introduced into the water until the 
plants become established.  Although seedlings rarely 
establish naturally in most wetland situations, seedlings 
can be produced easily indoors.  Seed collection should be 
delayed until the majority of the fruit in the cluster has 
turned brown, because immature fruit will fall from the 
cluster along with ripe ones when the cluster is shaken to 
remove the fruit.  It is not necessary to remove the fruit 
coverings before sowing, but this is easily done by 
rubbing.  The seed can be stored dry, but should be placed 
in a moist medium and stored in the refrigerator for three 
months before sowing.  The growing medium must be 
kept moist, but not saturated and air temperatures should 
be at least 75°F.  The seedlings can be planted in the 
wetland when they are approximately one foot tall. 

Management 
During the dormant season, old flower stalks and dead 
foliage can be removed, but it is a good idea to leave a 
long enough section of the leaf petiole so the cut end 
remains above the water level. 

Pests and Potential Problems 
Some minor, mainly aesthetic damage by leaf rolling 
insects has been noted. 

Environmental Concerns 
Light applications of a complete fertilizer will improve 
growth throughout the growing season, but care should be 
taken to prevent fertilizer movement into the ground 
water.  In a constructed wetland, the levels of nutrients 
applied in the sewage may be sufficient to maintain 
acceptable growth. 

 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
Indian Bayou Source powdery thalia was originally 
collected in the delta area of Mississippi was released as 
source identified material in 1996 by the Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (NRCS), the Mississippi 
Agricultural and Forestry Experiment Station (MAFES), 
and the Department of Wildlife and Fisheries at 
Mississippi State University. 
 
Prepared By 
Thomas C. Moss, USDA NRCS Jamie L. Whitten Plant 
Materials Center, Coffeeville, MS 

Citation 
Moss, T. C. 2011.  Plant fact sheet for powdery thalia 
(Thalia dealbata).  USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Jamie L. Whitten Plant Materials 
Center, Coffeeville, MS 38922. 
 
Published: September 2011 
 
Edited: 09Sep2011tm 
 
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

