SEA OATS 
Uniola paniculata
Plant Symbol = UNPA 

 L. 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS East Texas Plant 
Materials Center 

 R. Alan Shadow 
USDA NRCS East Texas Plant Material Center 

Uses 
Landscaping: 
Sea Oats is an attractive and important plant of the 
coastal community.  Seed heads from this plant are 
sometimes used in floral arrangements.  However, it 
should be noted that this species is protected in some 
states due to the vital role it plays in shoreline 
stabilization.  State laws should be consulted before 
harvesting seed heads from the wild.  Sea Oats is 
very valuable as a dune builder and stabilizer. 
 
Forage: 
Sea Oats is reported to have high palatability to 
browsing animals and moderate palatability to 
grazing animals.  However, due to the location of its 
habitat, protected status, and low protein content, it 
has no value as a forage plant.   
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

Description and Adaptation 
Sea oats is a long lived, slow growing, warm season, 
perennial grass commonly associated with the upper 
dunes along beach fronts.  It grows erect to 
approximately 6 feet in height at maturity, and has 
leaves that can grow to 24 inches in length.  The 
leaves are narrow, less than 1 inch in width, and taper 
towards their ends.  The ends of the leaves are often 
brown and curled in appearance.  It produces a large 
seed head, or panicle, during the summer.  The 
panicles are made up of many flat spikelets 
containing seed.  The panicle turns from green to 
straw colored in late summer as the plant matures.  
The stem of the plant has bulges, or nodes, near the 
soil surface.  These will often root down and anchor 
to the soil surface as wind born sediment accumulates 
around the plant.  Sea oats is also rhizomatous.  
These rhizomes have a scale-like appearance when 
young, and can be seen as pale yellow, sharp, stiff, 
protrusions near the base of the plant.   
 
Sea oats is very drought tolerant.  This species 
produces a massive root system, and will tolerate salt 
spray and brief inundation with salt water.  It prefers 
full sun, and thrives in areas with blowing sand, such 
as dunes along the upper beach front.  Burial of the 
plant’s base by blowing sand actually stimulates plant 
growth and helps the plant spread via rhizomes and 
tacking down at the stem nodes.  It prefers coarse 
sediments, but will tolerate medium grained 
sediments.  It will not tolerate fine grained sediments, 
and has a difficult time surviving in lower, wetter 
portions of the beach area.   Though it is capable of 
surviving brief inundations of salt water, it will not 
tolerate water logging.       
 
Distribution:  Sea oats can be found on beach fronts 
and barrier islands along the eastern seaboard of the 
United States from Virginia to Florida.   Their range 
extends along the coast line of the Gulf States, south 
into portions of Mexico.  It can also be found in the 
Bahamas and portions of Cuba.              
 
Establishment 
Sea oats is not a prolific seed producer.  It produces 
large panicles with numerous spikelets.  However, 
very few seed are actually produced.  Seed is viable 
and will grow readily in greenhouse conditions.  
However, there are no sources of commercial seed 
available.    
 
Sea oats is predominantly established from 
containerized material and vegetative propagules.  

 
 

 

Species Coordinator: Citation 
 
Shadow, R. A. 2007.. Plant fact sheet for Sea oats 
(Uniola paniculata L.
. USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, East Texas Plant Material 
Center, Nacogdoches, TX 75964 

Published October, 2007 

Edited: 17Mar10jad 

For more information about this and other plants, 
please contact your local NRCS field office or 
Conservation District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, 
and visit the PLANTS Web site 
<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

This species is rhizomatous and can be expanded by 
splitting larger plants into smaller propagules.  Sea 
oats is relatively slow growing and will require time 
to recover from the shock of being split into smaller 
units and transplanting.  It responds well to 
fertilization, but requires little to no nutrient input in 
field situations.      
 
Plantings on 2-5 foot centers have proven to be very 
effective.  Due to the harsh environment this species 
inhabits, there is little competition from other plants.  
Site prep work is usually not needed.  Plantings in 
early spring or fall produce the least amount of stress 
by allowing establishment time before the harshest 
portions of the year arrive.  Though this species is 
very drought tolerant, plantings should be timed 
when adequate moisture is present.  This will help 
reduce the shock associated with transplanting.        
 
Management 
Once established, Sea oats require very little 
management.   Traffic into newly planted areas 
should be limited until the plants have become 
successfully established.  A slow release fertilizer 
pellet is beneficial during early establishment.  
However, routine fertilization is not required.     
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no known pests or potential problems 
associated with this species. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
Sea oats is an extremely valuable plant for coast line 
and barrier island protect.  Its massive root system is 
capable of holding soil and sand in place during 
extreme weather events such as hurricanes and 
tropical storms.  This plant’s habitat puts it at the 
forefront of shoreline protection.  It is also capable of 
catching blowing sand and building dunes.  It is very 
important to natural and artificial dune stabilization 
throughout much of its range.    
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Caminada Germplasm is a pre-varietal release from 
the Golden Meadow Plant Material Center, Galliano, 
Louisiana 
 
Prepared By:  
R. Alan Shadow, Soil Conservationist, East Texas 
Plant Material Center, Nacogdoches, TX 
 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

