CULVER’S ROOT 

Veronicastrum virginicum (L.) 

Farw. 

Plant Symbol = VEVI4 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS Norman A. Berg National 
Plant Materials Center, Beltsville, MD 

 
Photo by Catherine Callaghan USDA, NRCS Norman A. Berg National 
Plant Materials Center. Purplehead sneezeweed and bee balm also 
shown 

Alternate Names 
Bowman’s Root 

Uses 
Conservation:  Culver’s root is a native, clumping, 
perennial wildflower growing well in moist to wet 
meadows and prairies. It is a good component of a 
pollinator seed mixture seeding native grasses and 
wildflowers together. It grows easily in sunny locations 
and combines well with wildflowers such as asters, bee 
balm, cardinal flower, swamp milkweed, goldenrods and 
ironweeds.   

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
 

Plant Fact Sheet

 
Wildlife:  The most common visitors to the flowers are 
long and short tongued bees, which collect pollen and 
nectar. Other pollinators include honeybees, bumblebees, 
mason bees, green metallic bees and masked bees. Other 
insect visitors include sphecid wasps, butterflies, moths 
and syrphid flies.  The seeds are too small to be of interest 
to birds.   
Ethnobotanical:  The Cherokee, Iroquois, Chippewa and 
Menominee Indians used this plant for a multitude of 
medicines. It is used as an analgesic, cathartic 
(accelerated defecation), emetic (induces vomiting), 
treatment for coughs, fevers and rheumatism and to assist 
with childbirth.   
Landscape:  Culver’s root is a tall, durable, adaptable and 
easily grown. It’s beautiful (usually white, purple to pink) 
flowers occur at a time of year (July - September) when 
most other plants are not flowering.  It sometimes needs 
staking and is a good wildflower for meadows, borders, 
wetlands and rain gardens.  It makes a nice cut flower 
lasting as much as a week in fresh arrangements. 

Status 
Culvers root is threatened in Massachusetts and New 
York and endangered in Vermont.  Please consult the 
PLANTS Web site and your State Department of Natural 
Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., threatened 
or endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland 
indicator values). 

Description and Adaptation 

Culver’s root distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database. 

 

 

 

 

For updated distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 

Description:  Culver’s root is a native perennial 
wildflower growing 3 to 6 feet tall. The genus name 
Veronicastrum is a combination of Veronica and the 
suffix astrum (false), which describes this plants 
resemblance to Veronicas. It is one of only two species in 
the genus. Its common name probably originates from an 
eighteenth century doctor or herbalist who popularized its 
use for various ailments. The central stem is round and 
smooth.  Along the stem are 3 to 7 leaves arranged so that 
all leaves are attached at the same point and wrap around 
the stem (whorled).  These leaves are up to 6 inches long 
with finely toothed (serrated) edges.  At the top of the 
plant slender spikes of white, pink or blue flowers up to 8 
inches long appear from July – September. These flowers, 
which bloom from the top to the bottom, are not fragrant, 
last about a month and resemble a candelabrum. The 
small seeds can be carried by the wind several feet from 
the mother plant.  The root system has a central taproot as 
well as underground stems (rhizomes).   

Establishment 
General:  The seed capsules are produced in large 
quantities within the small woody capsules.  Collect the 
capsules when they are yellow, they will turn brown when 
fully ripe. The seeds do not fall out of the capsules easily 
and usually have to be slightly crushed (a rolling pin 
works well) in order for the seed to be released.  A very 
small screen should be used to separate the seed from the 
chaff.  The seed should be stratified before sowing by 
storing in a sealed, labeled container or plastic bag with 
wet sand or peat moss at 38 to 40 degrees Fahrenheit for 
90 days. 
Propagation by seeds:  After stratifying sow seeds in a 
soil mix of one-third sand and two-thirds commercial plug 
mix. Keep the seeds will-lit (light is required for 
germination) and the air temperature between 60 and 80 
degrees Fahrenheit.  Germination percentages are usually 
high (80% range), and seedlings are large enough to 
transplant by midsummer. Even though Culver’s root is 
found in damp sunny locations and sometimes wetlands, 
the greatest threat to seedling survival is overwatering.  
To establish a native wildflower and grass meadow, sow 
about 15,000 seed (.2ounces.) per acre with a native seed 
drill or comparable equipment.  Plants grown from seed 
will flower in their second year.   

 

Propagation by cuttings/division:  Culver’s root is most 
easily propagated by divisions in the late fall or early 
spring. Each rootstock segment must have a bud to be 
successful.   
Two to three node tip cuttings (softwood) root easily in 
the late spring.   

Management 
It grows slowly for the first year but recovers in the 
second growing season. Although it is adaptable to 
growing in various soils and moisture levels, it is not an 
overly aggressive wildflower. The stems of Culver’s root 
l may need staking. Pinching back the plants will sacrifice 
the architectural effect of the foliage. 

Pests and Potential Problems 
No known or potential problems at this time. 

Environmental Concerns 
No known environmental concerns. 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials  
Culver’s root is available from nurseries specializing in 
native plants, ‘Lavender Towers’ is a cultivar with pale 
purple flowers.  . 

Prepared By  
Shawn Belt, NRCS, Norman A. Berg National Plant 
Materials Center, Beltsville, MD 

Citation 
Belt, S. 2011.  Plant fact sheet for Culver’s root 
(Veronicastrum virginicum). USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Norman A. Berg National Plant 
Materials Center, Beltsville, MD 20705 

Published April 2011 

Edited: 16Mar2011 SVB, 25Apr2011 JW, 21Apr2011 RG 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

.

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

