BLUE VERVAIN 
Verbena hastata (L.) 
Plant Symbol = VEHA2 

   
Contributed by: USDA, NRCS, Norman A. Berg National 
Plant Materials Center, Beltsville, MD  

Thomas Barnes@USDA, NRCS-PLANTS Database 

 

Blue verbena 
Simpler’s joy 

Alternate Names 
Swamp vervain 
Swamp verbena 
Uses   
Ethnobotanical: Blue vervain is used internally to treat 
depression, fevers, coughs, cramps, jaundice, and 
headaches.  Externally, it is used for acne, ulcers, and 
cuts.   
Warning: Blue vervain can interfere with blood pressure 
medication and hormone therapy.  Large doses will 
induce vomiting and diarrhea.   
Landscaping: Blue vervain produces very attractive 
purplish-blue flowers in late summer.  It can grow in 
degraded wetland habitats and is an excellent landscaping 
substitute for several invasive species, including 
European wand loosestrife, purple loosestrife, and purple 
foxglove. 
Wildlife: The cardinal, swamp sparrow, field sparrow, 
song sparrow, and slate-colored junco eat the seeds of 
blue vervain.  The cottontail rabbit will sometimes eat the 
foliage; most other mammalian herbivores avoid it due its 

 
 

 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

bitter taste.  The caterpillars of the verbena moth feed on 
the leaves and it is the larval host for the common 
buckeye butterfly.  Long and short tongued bees collect 
the nectar and sometimes the pollen.  Other bee 
pollinators include: epoline cuckoo bees, eucerine miner 
bees , halictid bees, and the verbena bee, a specialist 
pollinator.  In addition the thread-waisted wasp, bee 
flies, thick-headed flies and golden soldier beetle are also 
known to all visit blue vervain.   
 
Description and Adaptation  
Blue vervain is a native, perennial wildflower that grows 
from 2 to 5 feet tall.  Its hairy, square stems can be green 
or red.  The toothed, lance shaped leaves progress in pairs 
up the stem and are about 6 inches long by 1 inch wide. 
 Purplish-blue flowers bloom in multiple, showy, 
elongated panicles (flowers arranged on a stem) and are 
up to 5 inches long.  Each bloom is about 1/4 inch across 
and conspicuously lobed.  Blue vervain blooms in mid to 
late summer; approximately 1 1/2 months after blooming 
each bloom gives way to four oblong, reddish-brown, 
triangular-convex “nutlets.”  Blue vervain spreads 
through rhizomes, horizontal roots that produce new 
plants.   
  
Blue vervain prefers moist conditions and full to partial 
sun.  It can grow in disturbed sites and is commonly 
found in moist meadows, thickets, and pastures, as well as 
riversides, marshes, ditches, and river-bottom prairies.   
 

 
Blue Vervain distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database.   
   
For updated distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.   
 
Establishment  
General: Collect nutlets in late summer or early fall and 
spread them over a clean, dry, indoor surface for several 
days.  Once the nutlets are dry, crush them lightly to 

Citation  
Kirk, S. and S.Belt. 2010.   Plant fact sheet for blue 
vervain (Verbena hastata).  USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Norman A. Berg National Plant 
Materials Center.   Beltsville, MD 20705.   
   
Published: [February, 2011] 
 
Edited: [07Mar2010smk, 20Dec2010svb] 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

release the ripe seeds.  The seeds should be stratified 
before sowing by storing in a sealed, labeled container or 
plastic bag with wet sand or peat moss at 38 to 40 degrees 
Fahrenheit for three months.  
Propagation by seeds: After stratifying, sow seeds in a 
soil mix of one-third sand and two-thirds commercial plug 
mix.  Keep the seeds well-lit and the air temperature 
between 60 and 80 degrees Fahrenheit.  Established plants 
will self-seed in the fall.   
Propagation by cuttings: Take 3 to 4 inch long stem tip 
cuttings in early spring.  Remove the lower leaves and 
insert the stems into a sand and perlite rooting medium.  
In 4 to 5 weeks the cuttings should be well rooted and can 
be transplanted.  (For blue vervain, seed propagation is 
often preferred over propagation by cuttings.) 
   
Management  
Pinch off the tops of the plants several times during the 
growing season to encourage branching and a bushier 
growth habit.   
   
Pests and Potential Problems  
No known pests or potential problems. 
 
Environmental Concerns  
No known environmental concerns. 
   
Control  
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use it safely.   Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method.    
   
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
There are no recommended cultivars or selected materials 
at this time.   
 
Prepared By:  
Samantha Kirk and Shawn Belt NRCS, Norman A. Berg 
National Plant Materials Center, Beltsville, MD 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

