 

Plant Fact Sheet

disturbed rangelands.  Use this plant as a native 
alternative for crown vetch in landscaping.   
 
Status 
American vetch is listed as endangered/extirpated in 
Maryland. Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your 
State Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicatorvalues). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation 
if not properly managed.  Please consult with your local 
NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service 
office, state natural resource, or state agriculture 
department regarding its status and use.  Weed 
information is also available from the PLANTS Web site 
at http://plants.usda.gov.  Please consult the Related Web 
Sites on the Plant Profile for this species for further 
information. 
 
Description and Adaptation 
American vetch is a native, perennial, climbing vine that 
grows approximately 1 to 2 feet tall.  Each plant has a 
single stem.  Tendrils emerge from the end of the multiple 
leaflets to help secure the plant to the climbing structure.  
The purple flowers, which are gathered together in 
racemes (flower stalks) of 3 to 10 flowers, appear in late 
spring (May through August) and give way to 1 to 1.5 
inch pods about one month after flowering.  Each pod 
contains two or more pea like brown seeds.  American 
vetch spreads through rhizomes (roots that spread out 
from the parent plant and produce new plants).  
 
Distribution: American vetch grows in medium- to finely-
textured moist to dry soils in full sun.  It is widely 
distributed west of the Mississippi River and in the 
northeastern United States (USDA cold hardiness zones 4 
through 7). 
 
Habitat: American vetch grows in open patches in 
swampy woods, road banks, fencerows, borders, mixed 
forests, meadows, foothill canyons, and clearings.   
 

AMERICAN VETCH 

Vicia americana Muhl. Ex Willd. 
Plant Symbol = VIAM 
 
Contributed by: USDA, NRCS, Norman A. Berg National 
Plant Materials Center, Beltsville, MD 

 

Robert H. Mohlenbrock. USDA NRCS. 1992. 
 
Alternate Names 
Purple vetch 
American deer vetch 
Stiff-leaf vetch 
 
Uses 
Crop: American vetch fixes nitrogen and can be grown as 
a cover preceding late spring-planted crops.   
Conservation:  American vetch is a drought-tolerant 
climbing vine excellent for sunny and partially shady 
locations.  It is a native plant and can be part of a wildlife 
seed mixture where native grasses and wildflowers are 
seeded together.  It will support itself using tall grasses 
such as rye . 
Ethnobotanical:  Native Americans used the pods, seeds, 
and leaves of American vetch as food.  A poultice of the 
leaves has been used to treat spider bites, an infusion of 
the plant has been used as eyewash and an infusion of the 
tops has been used as a wash in sweat houses. American 
vetch has also been used as a panacea, an aphrodisiac, and 
a good luck charm.  Native Americans would get horses 
to smoke the plant to increase the horses’ endurance. 
Landscaping and wildlife: American vetch is an excellent 
grazing and fodder plant for game birds, small mammals, 
black bear, grizzly bear, and mule deer.  Horses, sheep, 
and cattle will browse on the aerial portions of American 
vetch.   Growing in disturbed sites it can be planted to 
help restore roadsides, former coal mine sites and 

 
 

 

 

Prepared By  
Samantha Kirk and Shawn Belt, NRCS, Norman A. Berg 
National Plant Materials Center, Beltsville, MD 
 
Citation 
Kirk, S. and Belt, S. 2010.  Plant fact sheet for American 
Vetch (Vicia americana), USDA, Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Norman A. Berg National Plant 
Materials Center, Beltsville, MD 20705 
 
Published: [January, 2011]    
 
Edited: [4-2009 SMK, 12-2010 SVB] 

 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov>

 
 

 

American vetch distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database. 
 
For updated distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Establishment 
Direct sow American vetch in the fall.  Unscarified seed 
will germinate in approximately 14 days.  Scarification 
(scratching or etching) the seeds will decrease their 
germination time to 3 to 7 days but will not improve their 
overall germination capacity.  Due to the climbing habit 
of the plant, it is often sown in combination with rye with 
the rye providing support.  In a mixture, 50 pounds of rye 
and 15 to 20 pounds of vetch per acre should be used.  
Most varieties of vetch are seeded at 20 to 40 pounds per 
acre.  American vetch will self-reseed. 
 
Management 
American vetch  grows in moist to dry soils and typically 
reaches its full height only if it attaches itself to a 
supporting structure.  It prefers full sun and neutral to 
slightly acidic soil.   
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Vicia  spp. is susceptible to several species of Botrytis 
fungus.  Vetch seeds are also susceptible to vetch bruchid 
(Bruchus brachialis) injury.  This insect pest is largely 
responsible for poor natural reseeding of vetch in 
pastures.  
 
Environmental Concerns 
No concerns known environmental concerns. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
There are no recommended cultivars or selected materials 
at this time. 
 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

