 

 

EELGRASS 

Zostera marina Linnaeus 

Plant Symbol = ZOMA 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS Norman A. Berg National 
Plant Materials Center, Beltsville, MD 

 

Photo courtesy of P. Bergstrom, National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration, Chesapeake Bay Office, Annapolis, Maryland. 

Alternate Names 
Common Alternate Names: seawrack, tapegrass 

Uses 
Native American cultures consumed the leaf bases and 
rhizomes of eelgrass and used the bulk plant material for 
smoking meats.  Eelgrass was once harvested for use as 
stuffing in mattress manufacture prior to industrial 
production of synthetic fibers.  Due to its low 
flammability, dried eelgrass shoots were also used as 
housing insulation. In addition, watermen frequently ship 
live blue crabs (Callinectes sapidus) in eelgrass-packed 
boxes.  
 
Eelgrass is desirable for nearshore restoration, due to its 
ability to stabilize sediments and reduce erosion. Seagrass 
restoration is also a tool for improving water quality and 
providing habitat for various aquatic and coastal species. 

 

Plant Fact Sheet

Status 
Eelgrass populations, along with other submerged plants, 
have declined over the past 40 years due to poor water 
quality in coastal regions. Poor water quality is a result of 
increased turbidity due to sediment from runoff and algal 
blooms associated with eutrophication. Populations have 
declined most significantly in Delaware Bay (almost 
completely absent) and Chesapeake Bay (reduced).  
 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Description and Adaptation 
Eelgrass has a thick, creeping underground stem 
(rhizome), 2 to 5 cm long, with many roots and nodes 
spaced 1 to 3.5 cm apart.  Alternate ribbon-like leaves 
with rounded tips arise from these nodes and grow up to 
1.2 m long and 2 to 12 mm wide, hence the alternate 
name tapegrass. Depending upon region and water clarity, 
eelgrass may grow in depths of less than 3 m (east coast 
United States) or in depths of more than 5 m (Pacific 
Northwest coast United States).  Eelgrass growing in 
shallow, sandy substrates (eelgrass prefers sandy 
sediments) tends to have shorter leaves, whereas plants in 
deeper, muddy, quiet conditions have longer leaf growth.  
 
Reproduction is both sexual and asexual.  Plants flower in 
late spring and each plant contains male and female 
flowers (monoecious). Flowers are fertilized by drifting 
pollen.  Seeds develop on specialized reproductive shoots 
(spathes) that eventually break off and float to the surface 
where they drift and release seeds.  For asexual 
reproduction, the rhizome grows and elongates, sending 
up new shoots.  Entire beds may consist of clones from 
one original plant.  
 
Eelgrass is a true seagrass, requiring minimum salinities 
of 10 PSU (Practical Salinity Unit, a unit of measure 
based on the properties of seawater conductivity) or 
greater. It grows along both coasts of North America, 
ranging from North Carolina to Labrador on the east 
coast, and from Baja, California north to southeastern 
Alaska.  It has a worldwide distribution in coastal waters 
of similar conditions. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

Eelgrass distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database. 

For updated distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 

Establishment 
Eelgrass beds are well established in coastal regions with 
appropriate salinity and water quality. Restoration in 
regions currently devoid of eelgrass beds is achieved 
either through transplanting of adult plants or through 
seed dispersal.  

Management 
Eelgrass beds are critical habitat for a variety of 
commercially and recreationally important aquatic 
species, including the blue crab, juveniles of a variety of 
commercially important finfish, and several species of 
shorebirds. Because of their economic importance, 
eelgrass beds are managed so that impacts or destructive 
activities are prohibited.  Such activities include, but are 
not limited to boating (due to prop scars) and hydraulic 
clam dredging (due to destruction of beds).  

Pests and Potential Problems 
Eelgrass is susceptible to wasting disease caused by 
infestation of Labyrinthula zosterae, previously classified 
as a slime mold, but genetically more closely related to 
stramenopiles, a large algal group. Eelgrass populations in 
the North Atlantic were severely impacted by the wasting 
disease in the 1930s. The remaining populations appear to 
coexist with moderate levels of Labyrinthula with rare 
outbreaks leading to mortality. Plants are directly 
consumed by a variety of migratory birds. 

Environmental Concerns 
Due to the deterioration of water quality in many coastal 
areas over the past 40 years eelgrass populations have 
declined. The lack of sunlight penetrating the water 
column is the most likely cause of this decline. 

Because of the many ecological benefits from eelgrass, 
there is concern about the environmental impacts 
associated with its decline. In addition, increasing ocean 
temperatures predicted by climate change models are 
likely to cause a shift in the species distribution to more 
northern climates, as eelgrass cannot tolerate warm water. 

Control 
Eelgrass is a native species that regularly colonizes 
marine habitats.  It is not invasive, and therefore no 
chemical applications or physical removal is justified. In 
many areas it is protected from destruction or removal by 
state and/or federal regulatory agencies. 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
Current research centers on seed-based approaches to 
restoring eelgrass beds.  Seeds used for restoration must 
be harvested from naturally-occurring populations as 
eelgrass has not been successfully propagated in a 
controlled setting.  

Prepared By  
Robert F. Murphy, Leslie L. Orzetti and Wesley R. 
Johnson, Ecosystem Solutions, Inc.  
 
Citation 
Murphy, R., L. Orzetti and W. Johnson. 2011. Plant fact 
sheet for eelgrass (Zostera marina). USDA, Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Norman A. Berg 
National Plant Materials Center. Beltsville, MD  20705 

Published:  January, 2012 

Edited: 06October2011 JW 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

