 
 

 

Plant Guide

Linnaeus apparently based the original description of 
Agrostis alba on a specimen of Poa nemoralis 
(Hitchcock, 1971). Historically, several varieties have 
been described, yet other authors have combined A. 
gigantea under a broader A. stolonifera (creeping 
bentgrass) (Cronquist et al., 1977). Currently the 
PLANTS database recognizes A. gigantea as a separate 
species from A. stolonifera with A. gigantea being 
primarily rhizomatous while A. stolonifera typically 
produces stolons. This plant guide addresses A. gigantea 
in the broad sense which includes earlier treatments of A. 
stolonifera var. major.  
 
Uses  
Livestock:  
Cattle prefer nearly all other cultivated grasses to redtop.  
It remains green summer long and is useful in western 
states in pasture plantings in mountain meadows. It is 
considered preferred feed for cattle and horses in spring 
and summer and a desirable feed in fall and winter. It is 
considered a preferred feed for sheep in spring and a 
desirable feed in summer (Ogle and Brazee, 2009).    
  
Hay: One of the primary uses of redtop is for grass hay.  
  
Turf:  
Though creeping bentgrass (A. stolonifera) is much more 
prevalent in the turf industry than redtop, this species is 
used throughout North America and Europe in lawns and 
golf courses. It is also used for overseeding as a winter 
lawn grass in the South East.  
  
Erosion control:  
Redtop is commonly used for erosion control in plantings 
along riparian zones and wetlands. It germinates very 
rapidly and performs well on acidic low fertility soils. Its 
root system is well suited for holding soils on wetlands, 
waterways, ditchbanks and burned or cutover-timberland 
(Wasser, 1982).   
  
Revegetation:  
This species has been used to recapture sites which are 
very acid to land affected with heavy metals and poor soil 
quality such as mine spoils. It has been shown to have a 
higher tolerance of acidic soils than Kentucky bluegrass 
(Balasko et al., 1995).   
 
Wildlife: 
Redtop is a preferred feed for elk in spring, but is used 
sparingly by deer (Ogle and Brazee, 2009). It is 
commonly used as cover by numerous species of birds 
and small mammals. Ducks and geese use redtop for 
nesting cover, and it is grazed by geese.  
  

REDTOP 

 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Idaho Plant Materials 
Program  

Agrostis gigantea Roth 

Plant Symbol = AGGI2 

Figure 1.  Redtop (Agrostis gigantea).  Photo by Robert Soreng @ 
USDA-NRCS PLANTS database. 

 

Alternate Names 
Agrostis alba auct. Non. L. 
Agrostis depressa Vassey 
Agrostis palustris Huds. 
Agrostis stolonifera L. var. major (Gaudin) Farw. 
Black bent 
Carpet bentgrass 
Redtop bent 
Redtop bentgrass 
 
Redtop has undergone numerous name changes over time, 
and the actual placement of the multiple species and 
varieties remains confused due to hybridization. 
 

 

Status  
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State Department 
of Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).  
 
Weediness  
Redtop has been described as weedy or invasive in some 
states and European countries. It may become weedy or 
invasive in some regions or habitats and may displace 
desirable vegetation if not properly managed.  Consult 
your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension 
Service office, state natural resource, or state agriculture 
department regarding its status and use.  Weed 
information is available from the PLANTS Web site at 
plants.usda.gov
Profile for this species for additional information.  

.  Consult related web sites on the Plant 

Description 

 

Figure 2. Line drawing of redtop. Hitchcock, A.S. (rev. A. Chase). 1950. 
Manual of the grasses of the United States. USDA Miscellaneous 
Publication No. 200. Washington, DC 
 
General: 
Grass family (Poaceae). Redtop is a cool season (C-3), 
sod-forming, perennial grass native to Europe (Wasser, 
1982). The plant produces culms up to 4 feet in height 
which can be erect, decumbent or semi-prostrate in form. 
The leaf blades are flat, folded or curled, approximately 
1/8 to 3/8 inches wide with a prominent ligule at the 
junction of the leaf blade and sheath. The inflorescence is 
an open panicle with ascending branches. The spikelets 

 

 

are small with the lemma reaching 0.08 inches long 
(Cronquist et al., 1977). The name redtop is derived from 
the reddish coloring of the panicle. The scaly, creeping 
rhizomes make a coarse, but fairly dense turf. The roots of 
redtop can reach 4 ft deep under favorable conditions 
(Troughton, 1957). There are approximately 4.85 million 
seeds/lb (USDA NRCS, 2010).  
  
Distribution:  
Redtop is native to Eurasia and North Africa and was 
introduced to North America in the 18th century as a lawn, 
meadow and pasture grass (Monsen et al., 2004). It has 
since become naturalized and widely distributed 
throughout the U.S. and Canada. It grows better in the 
moist mountain areas of the West and humid areas of the 
Northeast than in the warmer climates of the southern 
states. For current distribution, consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
  
Habitat:   
Redtop has been cultivated and planted extensively 
throughout North America and has been widely 
naturalized in numerous habitats.  It occurs in areas with 
shallow water, wet meadows and stream banks from sea 
level to 8,000 ft (Monsen et al., 2004). Redtop can be 
found growing in pure stands or with other wetland/wet 
meadow species such as sedges, rushes, and other grasses. 
It is also common in riparian areas growing in association 
with cottonwood, alder and willow species.  
  
Adaptation  
This species is broadly adapted to a wide range of soil and 
weather conditions. It thrives in cool moist habitats and is 
best adapted to the northern states but has been 
successfully established throughout North America, 
especially with management and irrigation.  
Redtop is best adapted to mesic to semi-hydric soils, and 
is well suited to areas receiving 18 to 40+ inches mean 
annual precipitation. The plants are tolerant of poorly 
drained and sub irrigated sites and sites that are frequently 
flooded.   
  
This species performs best on clay loam to loamy soils, 
but under irrigation will perform on nearly any soil type 
with the exception of limestone based soils. Redtop is 
adapted to soils with a pH of 4.5 to 8.0. It has a low 
tolerance to salinity.  
 
Redtop displays good grazing resistance due to its 
rhizomes, its low palatability and semi-prostrate growth 
form. Stands of redtop often increases in pasture mixes 
and will decrease under light to non-grazed situations.   
  
Establishment  
Redtop can be established by seed, sprigs, or sod. For 
seeding, plant at a depth of 0-1/4 inch into a smooth, firm, 
well-drained, weed free seed bed.  For turf plantings, seed 
at a rate of approximately 1 lb/1000 ft². For pasture and 
range plantings a rate of 0.5 lbs/ac is recommended (Ogle 

et al., 2009). Broadcast and lightly harrow to cover seed. 
Compaction of soil over seed may cause crusting which is 
impenetrable by seedlings. Use of an inert carrier or 
dilutent when drill seeding can improve seed flow and 
metering small seed such as redtop.  
  
The soil surface should be kept moist during 
establishment. Early fall seeding is recommended which 
allows a minimum of 45 growing days prior to frost for 
good establishment if irrigation is available. If irrigation 
is not available, an early spring seeding is recommended.  
Do not apply nitrogen until the second growing season.   
  
Seedlings have low vigor and seeding often results in 
poor stands; however, once established, stands of redtop 
will readily spread and persist for many years (Monsen et 
al., 2004).  
  
Redtop is seldom seeded alone.  Better forage and high 
quality hay is produced if redtop is mixed with species 
such as timothy, creeping foxtail and/or clover species. 
Redtop grows rapidly after seeding and excessive seeding 
rates are not recommended, particularly in mixtures.    
  
Management  
Stands of redtop should not be grazed until the plants are 
at least 8 inches tall. Pasture mixes will need to be grazed 
closely in a rotation to keep plants producing palatable 
regrowth on wet and sub-irrigated sites. Redtop should 
not be grazed closer than three inches (USDA NRCS, 
1995).  
  
Cut hay in early flowering stage for best quality. Forage 
contains 8 to 9 percent protein when cut at full bloom and 
12 to 14 percent when cut before bloom. (USDA-NRCS, 
1995).   
Stands respond well to applications of fertilizer and lime. 
Low fertility critical areas should be fertilized prior to 
seeding.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems  
Redtop is known to develop ergot which can lead to 
livestock poisoning (Ontario, 2010). This species can also 
develop leaf rusts, spotting and snow mold, but these have 
generally not been a problem (Wasser, 1982).  
  
Environmental Concerns  
Redtop is an introduced species which can displace native 
vegetation under ideal conditions. It should not be planted 
in sites where revegetation of native species is desired. It 
hybridizes with other Agrostis species, so numerous non-
typical plants can be found in most populations.  
  
Seeds and Plant Production  
Seed production fields should be soil tested before 
planting to determine soil nutrient levels and fertilizer 
needs.    
  

 

 

Stands should be combined or swathed when plants are in 
the hard dough stage. Seed shatters readily, so delaying 
harvest can significantly reduce yields. Seed should be 
cleaned with air screens or clippers with a 28x28 upper 
screen and 50x50 lower screen (Wasser, 1982).   
  
Seed production fields yield approximately 75 lbs/ac with 
90 percent purity and 90 percent germination (Monsen et 
al., 2004).   
  
There are approximately 4,850,000 seeds per pound.  
  
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
There are several released materials of the stoloniferous 
creeping bentgrass, which are used readily as lawn and 
golf course varieties. There is currently only one known 
released variety of redtop.  
  
‘Streaker’ redtop was released in 1982 by Jacklin Seed 
Company and Lofts Seed.  It was chosen from among 21 
lots of seed which were evaluated for uniformity, vigor, 
seed yield and mechanical purity and cleanliness. It’s 
intended use is for overseeding of dormant warm season 
grasses; low maintenance turf, reclamation and pasture 
(Alderson and Sharp, 1994).  

SCS, Washington, DC.  

Iowa State University Press. Ames, IA.  

Flora. Vol. 6. The monocotyledons. Columbia Univ. 
Press, NY.  

References 
Alderson, J. and W. C. Sharp 1994. Grass varieties in the 
  United States. Agriculture Handbook No. 170. USDA, 
 
Balasko, J.A., G.W. Evers, and R.W. Duell. 1995. 
  Bluegrasses, ryegrasses, and bentgrasses. In: Barnes, 
  R.F., Miller, D.A. and C.J. Nelson. Forages. 5th ed. 
 
Cronquist, A., A.H. Holmgren, N.H. Holmgren, J.L. 
  Reveal, and P.K. Holmgren. 1977. Intermountain 
 
 
Hitchcock, A.S. 1971. Manual of the grasses of the 
  United States, 2nd edition. Dover Publications, Inc. 
  New York, NY.  
Monsen, S.B., Stevens, R. and N. Shaw. 2004. Grasses. 
 
 
 
  Technical Report RMRS-GTR-136-vol-2. p. 295-424.  
Ogle, D., and B. Brazee. 2009. Estimating initial stocking 
 
Ogle, D., L. St. John, M. Stannard, and L. Holzworth. 
 
2009. Grass, grass-like, forb, legume, and woody 
species for the Intermountain West. USDA-NRCS, 
 
 
ID-TN 24. Boise ID.   
Ontario. 2010. Poisoning of livestock by Plants-Fact 
 
Sheet. Ontario Ministry of Agriculture, Food and 
  Rural Affairs. Ontario, Canada.  
Troughton, A. 1957. The Underground Organs of 
  Herbage Grasses. Commonwealth Agricultural 
  Bureaux. Farnham Royal, Bucks, England.  

In: S.B. Monsen, R. Stevens, and N.L. Shaw 
[compilers]. Restoring western ranges and wildlands. 
Fort Collins, CO: USDA_FS-RMRS. General 

rates. USDA-NRCS, ID-TN 3. Boise, ID.  

redtop. USDA-NRCS. Columbia, MO.  

January 2010). USDA-NPDC, Baton Rouge, LA.  

FWS>OBS-82/56.  

species useful in revegetating disturbed lands in the 

USDA Forest Service. 1937. Range Plant Handbook. 
  Washington, D.C.  
USDA NRCS. 1995. Hay and pasture management of 
 
USDA NRCS. 2010. The PLANTS Database [Online]. 
  Available at http://plants.usda.gov (accessed 19 
 
Wasser, C.H. 1982. Ecology and culture of selected 
 
  west. USDI-FWS. Biological Services Program. 
 
  
Prepared By  
Derek Tilley; Range Scientist, USDA NRCS Plant 
Materials Center, Aberdeen, Idaho.  
  
Dan Ogle; Plant Materials Specialist, USDA NRCS, 
Boise, Idaho.  
  
Loren St. John; Team Leader, USDA NRCS Plant 
Materials Center, Aberdeen, Idaho.  
 
Citation  
Tilley, D., D. Ogle, and L. St. John. 2010. Plant  guide for 
redtop (Agrostis gigantea). USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Idaho Plant Materials Center. 
Aberdeen, ID. 83210.  

Published July, 2010 

Edited: 07Apr2010 djt; 07Apr10 dgo; 20Jan2010 lsj  

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

