WELSH’S MILKWEED 

Asclepias welshii N.H. 

Holmgren & P.K. Holmgren 

 

Plant Symbol = ASWE3 

 
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Idaho and Utah Plant 
Materials Program 
 

 
 

 

Plant Guide

 
39 in). The leaves are opposite, and broadly ovate; 6 
to 9 cm (2.3 to 3.5 in) long, and 3 to 6 cm (1.2 to 2.3 
in) wide (Welsh et al., 2003). The leaves and stems 
are covered with a white wooly tomentum, or 
pubescence, early in the season. Windblown sands 
abrade the hairs leaving the vegetation nearly 
glabrous later in the year. The inflorescence is a 
globose cluster of around 30 cream colored flowers 
with a rose-tinged middle. The fruit is a 4 to 8 cm 
(1.6 to 3.2 in) long pod or follicle. The seeds are 
large, 2 cm (1 in) long with a rudimentary coma, or 
tuft of hairs (USDI-FWS, 1992). 
 

 

Welsh’s milkweed (Asclepias welshii). Photo by J.P. Riser, 
Washington State University 

Uses 
There are no known human uses of Welsh’s 
milkweed. This species, unlike other members of the 
genus, is not toxic to livestock. However larger 
animals tend to avoid the unconsolidated sands that 
make up Welsh’s milkweed habitat, leaving it largely 
unutilized by grazers. 

Status 
Welsh’s milkweed was listed as a threatened species 
in 1987 with designated critical habitat (USDI-FWS, 
1987). 
 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Description 
General:  Milkweed family (Asclepiadaceae). 
Welsh’s milkweed is a perennial forb which grows 
from an extensive underground root system 
comprised of a taproot and horizontal runners 
connecting stem clusters. The plants grow with one to 
several erect stems to a height of 25 to 100 cm (10 to  

 

Welsh’s milkweed inflorescence. Photo by S. O’Kane 

 

Distribution:   
Welsh’s milkweed is currently known to occur in 
three populations in southern Utah and northern 
Arizona. The largest population of an estimated 
10,000 plants lies on the Coral Pink Sand Dunes in 
Kane County, Utah. A second Utah population of 
approximately 500 individuals is found in the Sand 
Hills, also in Kane County. A third population of 
approximately 500 plants is known at Sand Cove on 
the Kane County, Utah and Coconino County, 
Arizona border. 
 
For current distribution, consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Habitat:  
Welsh’s milkweed is found on shifting sands and 
dunes adjacent to sagebrush, juniper and ponderosa 
pine communities from 1,700 to 1,900 m (5,600 to 
6,200 ft) in elevation. Other dune-loving plant 
species found in association with Welsh’s milkweed 

include blowout grass (Redfieldia flexuosa), sand 
dropseed (Sporobolus cryptandrus), Indian ricegrass 
(Achnatherum hymenoides) and giant dunegrass 
(Calamovilfa gigantea). 
 
Adaptation 
Welsh’s milkweed is adapted to aeolian sands on 
active dunes in the arid deserts of southern Utah and 
northern Arizona. Mean annual precipitation in 
nearby Kanab, Utah is reported at 38 cm (15 in). 
 
Management 
The primary threats to Welsh’s milkweed involve 
potential habitat loss and habitat damage due to off 
highway vehicle (OHV) use (USDI-FWS, 1992). 
However; Welsh (2003) observed the species thriving 
despite the utilization of dunes for recreation, 
because OHV users tend to avoid vegetated areas. 
Management strategies in place include regulating 
OHV use, monitoring known populations, and 
inventorying suitable habitat. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no known pests or potential problems 
regarding Welsh’s milkweed. 

Environmental Concerns 
There are no known environmental concerns 
regarding Welsh’s milkweed. 

Seeds and Plant Production 
Flowering occurs from May to June with seed set and 
dispersal occurring from July to September (USDI-
FWS, 1992). Several potential pollinators that have 
been observed visiting Welsh’s milkweed include 
bees, wasps, and butterflies. One species of carpenter 
bee (Xylocopa californica ssp. arizonensis) and one 
species of bumble bee (Bombus bifarius) have been 
observed carrying milkweed pollen (USDI-FWS, 
1992). 

References 
USDI-FWS. 1987. Endangered and threatened 
wildlife and plants; final rule determining 
Asclepias welshii (Welsh’s milkweed) to be a 
threatened species with critical habitat. In: 
Federal Register. 52(208): 41435-41441. 

USDI-FWS. 1992. Welsh’s milkweed (Asclepias 
welshii) recovery plan. U.S. Fish and Wildlife 
Service, Denver, Colorado. 19pp. 

Welsh, S.L., N.D. Atwood, S. Goodrich, and L.C. 
Higgins. 2003. A Utah Flora. Third Edition, 
revised. Brigham Young University, Provo, UT. 

 
 

 

Prepared By: 
Derek Tilley; USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho. 
 
Loren St. John, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho. 
 
Dan Ogle, USDA NRCS, Boise, Idaho. 

Citation 
Tilley, D., L. St. John and D. Ogle. 2010. Plant guide 
for Welsh’s milkweed (Asclepias welshii). USDA-
Natural Resources Conservation Service, Idaho Plant 
Materials Center. Aberdeen, ID. 

Published Jan 2010 
Edited: 03Jan2011djt, 03Jan2011ls, 03jan2011dgo 

For more information about this and other plants, 
please contact your local NRCS field office or 
Conservation District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ 
and visit the PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant Materials Program 
Web site http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or 
availability of other Web sites. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

