 
 

 

 

Plant Guide

mountain dandelion) are known to be slightly or 
moderately grazed by cattle, horses and sheep (Forest 
Service, 1937).  

Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Description 
General:  Composite Family (Asteraceae).  Annual 
agoseris is a native, tap-rooted, annual forb with milky 
juice.  Stems are erect, 5-40 cm (1.97-15.75 in) tall.  
Leaves are mostly erect, margins glabrous or ciliate, 
usually oblanceolate to spatulate, 1-25 cm (0.39-9.84 in) 
long in a basal cluster.  Leaf margins are entire or lobed 
and may be glabrous or densely hairy.  Flower stalks 
elongate to 60 cm (24 in) after flowering and are glabrous 
or glabrate, or basally puberulent and apically hairy to 
tomentose, sometimes stipitate-glandular.  Flowers are 
yellow.  The seed is an achene with pappus bristles 4-9 
mm (0.16-0.35 in) long (Flora of North America, Online).  
Chromosome number is 2n=18, 36 (Jepson Manual, 
Online).  Agoseris species are sometimes confused with 
closely related genera, notably the dandelion (Taraxacum) 
and smaller species of hawksbeard (Crepis) (Forest 
Service, 1937). 

Distribution:  Annual agoseris is found from New Mexico 
north to Montana (but not in Wyoming) and westward to 
the Pacific Coast states and British Columbia.  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site. 

Habitat:  Annual agoseris is found on dry open lowlands 
and foothills with sagebrush/grass plant communities and 
mountain brush plant communities up to 7545 feet (2300 
m) elevation (Jensen, 2007). 

Adaptation 
No general information on adaptation could be found.  
Annual agoseris is adapted to serpentine soils (parent 
material serpentinite) found in California which has a 
mottled, greenish-gray color with a waxy feel to it.  These 
soils are lacking in nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium; 
have low calcium to magnesium ratio; and often have 
high concentrations of heavy metals.  No information 
could be found on minimum/maximum precipitation 
requirements, pH, etc. for annual agoseris. 

Establishment 
The competitive ability of annual agoseris may be limited 
since it has small seeds, germinates slowly, and is 

ANNUAL AGOSERIS 
Agoseris heterophylla (Nutt.) 

Greene 

Plant Symbol = AGHE2 

Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Idaho Plant Materials 
Center 

Annual agoseris.  Photo by Mrs. W.D. Bransford, Lady Bird 
Johnson Wildflower Center. 

Alternate Names 
None known. 

Uses 
Information on the use of annual agoseris is limited.  It is 
used by sage grouse (Pyle, 1992) and a native bee 
(Andrena cressonii cressonii) has been documented as 
visiting annual agoseris (Stubbs and others, 1992).  
Perennial species of Agoseris (also referred to as 

 

relatively rare in the plant community.  Early rains, 
followed by drought and then later rain may favor its 
germination as well as dispersal of seed by wind 
(Gulmon, 1992). 

Management 
Annual agoseris could be used as a minor component of 
restoration seed mixtures. Management strategies should 
be based on the key species in the established plant 
community. Grazing should be deferred on seeded lands 
for at least two growing seasons to allow for full stand 
establishment. 

Pests and Potential Problems 
Harvester ant (Veromessor andrei) and gopher activity 
may have a large impact on annual agoseris on California 
serpentine soils by their soil disturbance activities (Hobbs, 
1985; Gulmon, 1992). 

Environmental Concerns 
Annual agoseris is a native forb that has limited 
competitive ability and does not pose any environmental 
concern to native plant communities. 

Seed and Plant Production 
There are approximately 1,297,000 seeds per pound (35 
mg/100 seed) according to Gulmon (1992).  Seed is 
harvested mid-June to first of July.  Because the seed is 
naturally wind-dispersed and indeterminate, timing of 
harvest is critical.  Achenes are mature when seedhead 
opens, requiring multiple harvests to maximize seed yield.  
Plants typically occur at low densities requiring hand 
collection.  Larger chaff is removed by hand and seed is 
lightly rolled or rubbed between two boards to remove 
pappus.  Final processing can be accomplished with a 
variety of air column or air screen seed cleaners (Jensen, 
2007; Skinner, 2006). 
 
Pre-planting treatments may vary based on ecotype and 
age of seed.  Seed harvested from Nevada and stored for 2 
½ years was cold stratified (no details on temperature 
settings) for 3 weeks resulting in excellent germination 
and seed from same collection area stored for about 1 ½ 
years without cold treatment also resulted in excellent 
germination (Jensen, 2007).  Seed harvested near 
Pullman, WA had best germination with 30 days cold 
stratification.  Approximately 12 percent germination 
occurred without stratification (Skinner, 2006).  Baskin 
and Baskin (2002) reported seed germination to be 
enhanced by the presence of charred wood or aqueous 
extracts of it.  Seed is usually surface planted into soil-
filled containers prior to cold treatment but can be 
stratified prior to planting (Skinner, 2006). 
 
Germination occurs 3-6 days after plant containers are 
moved from cold treatment to greenhouse growing 
conditions.  The active growing phase takes 2-3 months.  
Skinner (2006) indicated that viable seed will not be 
produced under greenhouse conditions and suggested that 
a pollinator is needed.  Jensen (2007) was able to produce 

 

 

18 grams of seed from plants on 30 square feet of 
greenhouse bench. 
 
Because of the indeterminate seed head and fluffy 
characteristics of the achene, field-scale seed production 
is not practical with currently used production practices. 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
There are no released materials of annual agoseris. 

References 
Baskin, C., Baskin, J. 2002.  Propagation protocol for 

production of container Agoseris heterophylla (Nutt.) 
Greene plants; University of Kentucky, Lexington, 
Kentucky.  In: Native Plant Network.  University of 
Idaho, College of Natural Resources, Forest Research 
Nursery. http://www.nativeplantnetwork.org 
(Accessed April, 27, 2012).   

Flora of North America [Online].  Agoseris heterophylla.  

http://www.efloras.org (Accessed April 27, 2012). 

Forest Service, 1937.  Range Plant Handbook.  U.S. 

Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. United 
States Government Printing Office.  Variously 
paginated. 

Hobbs, R. 1985.  Harvester ant foraging and plant species 
distribution in annual grassland.  Oecologia 67: 519-
523. 

Gulmon, S. 1992.  Patterns of seed germination in 

Californian serpentine grassland species.  Oecologia, 
89:27-31. 

Jensen, S. 2007.  Propagation protocol for production of 

Agoseris heterophylla (Nutt.) Greene. Seeds (5.5cu.in 
root trainers); USDA FS – Rocky Mountain Research 
Station, Shrub Sciences Laboratory, Provo, Utah.  In: 
Native Plant Network.  University of Idaho, College 
of Natural Resources, Forest Research Nursery 
http://www.nativeplantnetwork.org (Accessed May 1, 
2012). 

Jepson Manual [Online].  Agoseris heterophylla .  

http:ucjeps.berkeley.edu (Accessed April 30, 2012). 
Pyle, 1992.  Response of Brood-rearing Habitat of Sage 

Grouse to Prescribed Burning in Oregon.  M.S. 
Thesis Oregon State University, Corvallis. 

Skinner, D. 2006.  Propagation protocol for production of 
container Agoseris heterophylla (Nutt.) Greene plants 
(10 cu. in.); USDA NRCS – Pullman Plant Materials 
Center.  In: Native Plant Network.  University of 
Idaho, College of Natural Resources, Forest Research 
Nursery. http://www.nativeplantnetwork.org 
(Accessed May 1, 2012).   

Stubbs, C., Jacobson, H., Osgood, E., and Drummond, F., 

1992.  Alternative Forage Plants for Native (Wild) 
Bees Associated with Lowbush Blueberry, 
Vaccinium spp., in Maine.  Technical Bulletin 148, 
Maine Agricultural Experiment Station. 

 
Prepared By:   

 

Loren St. John, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, ID 
 
Derek Tilley, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, ID 
 

Resources Conservation Service, Aberdeen Plant 
Materials Center. Aberdeen, Idaho 83210. 

Published May, 2012 
Edited: 11May2012ls; 14May2012dt; 17May2012gm; 
18May2012jab 

Citation 
St. John, L. and D. Tilley. 2012. Plant Guide for annual 
agoseris (Agoseris heterophylla). USDA-Natural 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

