 

 

MUHLENBERG 
MAIDENCANE 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS Brooksville Plant 
Materials Center 

Amphicarpum 

muehlenbergianum  
(Schult.) Hitchc. 
Plant Symbol = AMMU2 

 

Figure 1. Plant Materials Center Staff, Brooksville PMC, FL 

 
Alternate Names 
blue maidencane, Amphicarpum muhlenbergianum, 
AMFL2 Amphicarpum floridanum Chapm., 
goobergrass 
Uses 
Forage and Wildlife Use: Blue maidencane is very 
palatable forage that produces high yields in pure 
stands in flatwood and forested areas with up to 50 
percent shade.  It can be used successfully in 
silvopasture systems and, in South Florida, provides 
forage for nine months for cattle and deer.  
Continuous heavy grazing of this plant will reduce 
stands and allow the increase of less palatable species 
(increasers).  According to the University of Florida, 
average annual forage production for blue 
maidencane is about 4000 lb/ac with most of the 
growth occurring during the summer months. 
Erosion Control:  Blue maidencane is a facultative 
wetland species.  It most often occurs in wetlands and 
can be used in freshwater wetland restoration sites 
and constructed wetlands for wastewater 
management.  Although blue maidencane prefers 

 
 

 

 

Plant Guide

soils that are wet for part of the year, it will not grow 
in deep, stagnant water. 
Because it spreads rapidly from an extensive network 
of rhizomes, blue maidencane is an excellent 
candidate for erosion control and maintenance of 
water quality.  Mechanized harvesting and 
propagation can be used for plant increase and 
establishment.  
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
Description 
General: Blue maidencane is a native, warm season 
perennial grass with an extensive rhizome system.  
Hairless blades are flat and firm, narrow, and lance-
shaped with no prominent midribs; 3- to 5-inches 
long; and ¼- to ½-inches wide with rough margins 
that frequently become white at maturity.  Blades are 
greenish blue in color and are evenly distributed on 
the culm.  Basal leaves are mostly absent.  Stems are 
thin and leafy up to 3-ft tall, but usually decumbent 
(laying down).  Nodes and internodes are glabrous to 
pubescent.  Sheaths are open, with no auricles, and 
ligules have hairs.  Two types of inflorescences are 
produced, aerial and subterranean, but spikelets on 
aerial inflorescences are sterile.  Subterranean 
inflorescences are produced in a 1 to 5 spikelet 
panicle born at the end of the rhizomes.  Aerial seed 
stalks are 1- to 3- feet tall topped with 15 or more 
spikelets arranged in an open panicle 2- to 4-inches 
long.  Aerial spikelets are usually lacking a first 
glume, and the second glume and lemma are longer 
than the floret.  Aerial spikelets are lance-shaped, 
about 7-mm long, while the subterranean spikelets 
are egg-shaped, white, self-pollinating, and reach to 
9-mm long. 
Distribution: Blue maidencane is common 
throughout Florida and extreme southern Georgia, 
but is rare in Alabama, North Carolina, and South 
Carolina.  In Florida, the distribution is centered in 
south and central Florida and northward through the 
eastern half of the state.  For current distribution, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species 
on the PLANTS Web site. 
Habitat: Blue maidencane usually occurs in wetlands 
(estimated probability 67%-99%) and floodplains of 
streams and rivers, but it can occasionally found in 
upland sites.  It is well adapted to acid to neutral 

sandy soils that are wet for part of the year.  
Associated grass species are creeping bluestem 
(Schizachyrium scoparium) and broomsedge 
bluestem (Andropogon virginicus) in North and 
South Florida flatwoods, respectively.  It is 
associated with wiregrass (Aristida stricta) and 
switchgrass (Panicum virgatum) in intermittently 
ponded flatwoods and bottlebrush threeawn (Aristida 
spiciformis), wiregrass (Aristida stricta), hairy 
blustem (Andropogon longiberbis), and bluejoint 
panicum (Panicum tenerum) in sloughs.  It is found 
in the low pinelands in North and South Carolina and 
is reported to be tolerant of light shade. 

 

Figure 2.  Plant Materials Center Staff, Brooksville PMC, FL 

Establishment 
As blue maidencane’s aboveground spikelets are 
sterile and its underground seeds are very limited and 
difficult to dig, field plantings are established 
vegetatively by rhizomes or greenhouse plugs.  The 
recommended planting rate is 20 bu/ac or plugs set 
on 18 inch centers.  A bushel of blue maidencane 
usually contains about 750, 6- to 8-inch long, 3-mm 
diameter rhizome pieces.  Irrigated upland production 
fields can produce 2500 bu/acre if hand dug.  Yield 
will be lower if dug mechanically. 
Planting sites can be prepared with mechanical 
cultivation and plants can be established by sprigging 
or broadcasting rhizomes and disking them roughly 
4-inches deep into the site.  Appropriate sites would 
be mesic to wet flatwoods or wet prairies, at  
landscape positions above (upland) of those that 
normally support common maidencane (Panicum 
hemitomon).  Treating weed populations prior to 
planting will increase stand establishment success.  
Non-native or invasive rhizomatous species, such as 
bermudagrass (Cynodon dactylon) or cogongrass 
(Imperata cylindrica) must be eradicated before 
planting. 
Fertilizer applications during the establishment phase 
are not recommended.  Since the establishment area 

 

 

may be wet, runoff rates may be high and additional 
fertilizer often promotes weed growth.  Field trials 
have shown that nutrients released from vegetation 
management practices (herbicide and/or cultivation to 
kill existing vegetation) during site preparation 
supports excellent establishment of blue maidencane 
without supplemental fertilizer applications. 
Management 
Established plants should require no fertilizer or 
herbicide applications.  After the first year of 
establishment individual plants should spread 
quickly.  On appropriate sites, burning and/or disking 
in winter or early spring can reduce competition and 
help thicken stands. 
Blue maidencane is very nutritious and will be grazed 
by cattle most of the year, while deer will graze 
stands in the winter and spring.  To ensure stands will 
not decrease due to grazing pressure from livestock, 
they must be rested a minimum of 120 days after 
grazing to let plants fully recover. 
Pests and Potential Problems 
No serious pests of blue maidencane have been 
reported. 
Environmental Concerns 
An environmental assessment has been conducted for 
this species and no known serious environmental 
concerns were found.  Because the aboveground 
spikelets are sterile, movement from the planting site 
is limited to vegetative spread and there is little 
concern regarding invasiveness.  It is moderately 
competitive for limiting factors (light and nutrients) 
but can only become established in a narrow range of 
conditions.  It has not been observed to hybridize 
outside the species.  There have been no perceivable 
negative impacts on ecosystem processes, 
allelopathic effects on other plants, changes in 
community composition, or impacts on habitat for 
wildlife or domestic animals.   
Seeds and Plant Production 
Seed collection from blue maidencane is not 
suggested because aerial spikelets are sterile and 
underground fertile spikelets are not abundant. 
Individual plants can be propagated in planting trays 
in a greenhouse in large, cone-like deep plugs that 
measure 1-inch diameter by 6-inch deep.  Two, 4-
inch long rhizome pieces that have at least two nodes 
each should be planted in each cell in a growing 
medium that allows for ample drainage and is kept 
moist, but not wet. 
Cuttings should be kept in the greenhouse for at least 
three months to allow for ample root and shoot 
development.  Plants should be fertigated throughout 
the nursery production period with a 100 ppm of a 
complete balanced soluble fertilizer such as 15-15-15 

 

or 0.7 lb/100 ft2 14-14-14 slow release granular 
fertilizer. 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Gator Germplasm was collected in Citrus County, 
Florida not far from its northeastern border with 
Marion County.  The collection site is north of Tsala 
Apopka Lake in the floodplain of the Withlacoochee 
River, so it is often seasonally flooded.  Soil type at 
the collection site is Tavares fine sand with 0 to 5 
percent slopes.  The mean annual precipitation in the 
area is 53 inches; average maximum temperatures are 
83 °F; and average minimum temperatures are 59 °F, 
with approximately 300 frost-free days per year. 
References 
Brooksville FL, PMC.  2002.  2001  Activity Report. 

pp. 9-10.  Available from the USDA, NRCS 
Plant Materials Center, 14119 Broad St., 
Brooksville, FL 34601. 

 
Clayton, W.D., M.S. Vorontsova, K.T. Harman, and 
H. Williamson.  2011.  GrassBase – the online 
world grass flora.  [Online]. Available at 
www.kew.org/data/grasses-
db/www/imp00402.htm (accessed 29 March 
2011). 

 
Leithead, H.L., J.L. Yarlett, and T.N. Shiflet.  1971.  
100 native forage grasses in 11 southern states.  
Agric. Handbook 389, Soil Conservation 
Service, USDA, Washington, D.C. 

 
Radford, A.E., H.E. Ahles, and C.R. Bell.  1968.  

Manual of the vascular flora for the Carolinas.  
Univ. of North Carolina, Press, Chapel Hill. 

 
Mullahey, J.J, G.W. Tanner, and S. Coates.  2009.  
Range sites of Florida. Publication #CIR951, 
University of Florida, IFAS Extension, [Online]  
Available at www.edis.ifas.ufl.edu/uw126 
(accessed 29 March 2011). 

 
USDA, NRCS.  2011.  The PLANTS Database. 
[Online] Available at www.plants.usda.gov 

(accessed 29 March 2011). National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, LA 70874-4490 USA. 

 
Hitchcock, A.S.  1971.  Manual of the grasses of the 

United States. 2nd ed. A. Chase (ed.) Dover 
Publications, New York. 

 
Watson, L., and M.J. Dallwitz  1992.  Grass genera 
of the World:  Amphicarpum Kunth.  [Online].  
http://www.biologie.uni-hamburg.de/b-
online/delta/grass/www/amphicar.htm.  
(accessed 29 March 2011). 

 
Williams, M.J., and J. Grabowski.  2006  Brooksville 

Plant Materials Center: developing sources of 
native wetland plants for revegetation in Florida.  
Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Conference on 
Ecosystems Restoration and Creation, Plant City, 
FL. [Online]. http://www.plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov/pubs/flpmssy7475.pdf 
(accessed 29 March 2011).  

 
Yarlett, L. L.  1996.  Common grasses of Florida and 
the Southeast.  The Florida Native Plant Society, 
Spring Hill, FL. 

 
Prepared By:  C.M. Sheahan, J. Grabowski, and 
M.J. Williams; USDA-NRCS, Brooksville Plant 
Materials Center, Brooksville, Florida. 
 
Citation: Sheahan, C.M, J. Grabowski, and M.J. 
Williams. 2011. Plant guide for Muhlenberg 
maidencane (Amphicarpum muehlenbergianum). 
USDA-NRCS, Brooksville Plant Materials Center. 
Brooksville, FL.  
 
Edited: 24Jan2011 mjw; 29Jul2011 jmg 
For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or Conservation District at 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant Materials Program Web site 
http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or 
availability of other Web sites. 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

