 
 

 

Plant Guide

 
Description 
General: Legume family (Fabaceae). Goose Creek 
milkvetch is a mat-forming perennial forb arising 
from a narrow taproot. The stems are 3 to 11 cm (1.2 
to 4.3 in) long and lay prostrate on the ground. The 
leaves are pinnately compound with 5 to 15 wooly 
tomentose leaflets. Each leaflet is 3 to 7 mm (0.12 to 
0.28 in) long and oval in shape. The flowers are 9 to 
11 mm (0.35 to 0.43 in) long, pinkish purple and 
borne in clusters of 3 to 7 flowers per stem. The fruit 
is a claw shaped pod, 9 to 12 mm (0.35 to 0.47 in) 
long and 5 to 7 mm (0.20 to 0.28 in) wide, with 16 to 
20 ovules (Welsh et al., 2003). 
 
Distribution: 
Goose Creek milkvetch occupies an area 
approximately 32.5 km (20 mi) long and 6.4 km (4 
mi) wide where the Idaho, Nevada, and Utah borders 
meet. Known populations occur in the Goose Creek 
drainage in Cassia County, Idaho; Elko County, 
Nevada; and Box Elder County, Utah (USDI-FWS, 
2009). There were an estimated 60,000 plants prior to 
2007 when wildfires burned much of the known 
habitat. Accurate counts of Goose Creek milkvetch 
are complicated due to variability in annual 
abundance. 
 
For current distribution, consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Habitat:  
Goose Creek milkvetch occurs from 1,500 to 1,790 m 
(4,920 to 5,870 ft) elevation in sagebrush steppe plant 
communities. It can be found growing in association 
with Wyoming big sagebrush (Artemisia tridentata 
ssp. wyomingensis), Utah juniper (Juniperus 
osteosperma), green rabbitbrush (Chrysothamnus 
viscidiflorus), Sandberg bluegrass (Poa secunda), and 
needleandthread (Heterostipa comata).  
 
Adaptation 
Goose Creek milkvetch grows primarily on 
tuffaceous (a rock composed of the finer kinds of 
volcanic detritus usually fused together by heat) 
outcrops of the Salt Lake Formation in silty to 
gravelly sandy loam soils. The region of the Goose 
Creek drainage receives 23 to 30 cm (9 to 12 in) of 
annual precipitation (USDI-FWS, 2010). 
 
Management 
Management and protection of this species should be 
centered on habitat protection, especially against 

 

GOOSE CREEK 
MILKVETCH 

Astragalus anserinus N.D. 
Atwood, Goodrich and S.L. 

Welsh 

Plant Symbol = ASAN7 

Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Idaho and Utah Plant 
Materials Program 

Goose Creek milkvetch (Astragalus anserinus). Photo courtesy 
of Nevada Natural Heritage Program 
Alternate Names 
None 
 
Uses 
There are no known human uses of Goose Creek 
milkvetch. Grazing by rabbits has been observed. 

Status 
The USDI Fish and Wildlife Service determined in 
2007 that Goose Creek milkvetch might be warranted 
for listing as threatened or endangered and began a 
status review of the species. In 2009, following a 
thorough review, USDI-FWS found that listing was 
warranted, however listing was precluded by higher 
priority actions (USDI-FWS, 2009). In 2010 the 
species was officially added to the candidate species 
list and was assigned a Listing Priority Number 
(LPN) of 5 due to high magnitude, yet non-imminent 
threats (USDI-FWS, 2010). 
 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

 
 

 

 

invasion of cheatgrass (Bromus tectorum) and 
protection from wildfires.  
 
The USDI-FWS has identified several threats to 
Goose Creek milkvetch. In 2007, wildfire severely 
impacted known populations of Goose Creek 
milkvetch. The threat of fire is increasing due to 
continued invasion of annual weeds including 
cheatgrass. Establishment of high densities of 
cheatgrass is known to increase the fire return 
interval, making more habitat loss from fire likely. 
Cheatgrass and other weeds such as leafy spurge 
(Euphorbia esula) are also known to compete directly 
with Goose Creek milkvetch; however, control 
efforts to date have been largely successful in 
keeping weed invasion limited (USDI-FWS, 2009). 
Much of the nearby habitat of Goose Creek 
milkvetch has been altered as a result of intentional 
seeding of crested wheatgrass (Agropyron cristatum); 
however Goose Creek milkvetch’s primary habitat of 
steep slopes and rock composed of the finer kinds of 
volcanic detritus seems to preclude it from direct 
competition with crested wheatgrass. Habitat 
degradation from cattle grazing and development of 
livestock watering facilities also pose a threat to this 
species. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no known potential problems from disease, 
insects or fungi associated with Goose Creek 
milkvetch. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
There are no known environmental concerns 
associated with Goose Creek milkvetch. 
 
Seed and Plant Production 
Goose Creek milkvetch plants flower from late May 
to early June with fruit set in early June. Pollination 
and seed dispersal mechanisms are unknown. 
 
References 
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. 2009. Endangered 
and threatened wildlife and plants; 12-month 
finding on a petition to list Astragalus anserinus 

(Goose Creek milkvetch) as threatened or 
endangered. In: Federal Register. 74(174): 
46521-46542. 

U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. 2010. Endangered 
and threatened wildlife and plants; review of 
native species that are candidates for listing as 
endangered or threatened; annual notice of 
findings on resubmitted petitions; annual 
description of progress on listing actions. In: 
Federal Register. 75(217): 69222-69294. 

Welsh, S.L., N.D. Atwood, S. Goodrich, and L.C. 
Higgins. 2003. A Utah Flora. Third Edition, 
revised. Brigham Young University, Provo, UT. 

 
Prepared By: 
Derek Tilley; USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho. 
 
Loren St. John, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho. 
 
Dan Ogle, USDA NRCS, Boise, Idaho. 

Citation 
Tilley, D., L. St. John and D. Ogle. 2011. Plant guide 
for Goose Creek milkvetch (Astragalus anserinus). 
USDA-Natural Resources Conservation Service, 
Idaho Plant Materials Center. Aberdeen, ID. 

Published Feb 2011 
Edited: 03Feb2011djt; 03Feb2011ls; 03feb2011dgo 

For more information about this and other plants, 
please contact your local NRCS field office or 
Conservation District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ 
and visit the PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant Materials Program 
Web site http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or 
availability of other Web sites. 

 
 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

