 
 

 

Plant Guide

conifer plantations (Delong and Sanborn, 2000; 
Hauessler et al., 1990).  Compared to red alder (Alnus 
rubra), Sitka alder is considered potentially less 
competitive with young conifers because of its 
smaller stature and slower growth (Harrington and 
Deal, 1982).  It is not used for commercial timber but 
is a source of firewood.  

Wildlife: The palatability of Sitka alder is considered 
poor and forage value low for most big game animals 
and livestock (Uchytil, 1989), but others report that it 
is one of the most palatable of the native alders, being 
rated fair to good as browse for sheep in some areas 
(USDA Forest Service, 1988).  Selective browsing of 
this species by moose occurs in Idaho during summer 
months as leaves remain green (Pierce, 1984).  It is 
also considered high-quality moose browse in British 
Columbia.  Elk will browse the tender young shoots, 
while white-tailed and mule deer feed on leaves and 
twigs (Haeussler et al., 1990). Caribou also browse 
on Sitka alder. 

Alder twigs and leaves are consumed by muskrats, 
rabbits, snowshoe hares, and squirrels, while the 
seeds, buds, or catkins are an important source of 
food in winter for numerous song and game birds 
(Haeussler et al., 1990; Healy and Gill, 1974; Martin 
et al., 1951).  Beavers eat the bark and use the stems 
to build lodges and dams (USDA Forest Service, 
1988). Thickets provide thermal and hiding cover for 
big game and other wildlife, as well as nesting habitat 
for many small birds (Uchytil, 1989). Sitka alder is a 
source of pollen for honeybees, native bees, and other 
insects during the spring. 

Ethnobotanic: Native peoples of North American had 
practical uses for Sitka alder or its close relative 
green alder (Alnus viridis ssp. crispa).  The bark was 
a source of red or brown dye which was used to color 
wool and tanned animal skins (Agar and Agar, 1980; 
Anderson, 1939; Kari, 1985; Rousseau, 1945; Turner 
et al., 1980). Documentation of alder being used as a 
fragrance or scent (Turner et al., 1990) may refer to 
Sitka alder which is known for being sticky and 
sweet smelling.  Alder was burned as firewood and 
preferred for smoking fish (Ager and Agar, 1980; 
Kari, 1985).  One or both alders were considered a 
sign of water and the hard wood was used for making 
snowshoes, bows, or spoons (Compton, 1993; Kari, 
1985; Turner et al., 1990).  

Sitka and green alder had several medicinal uses. 
Pistillate catkins of Sitka alder were crushed and 
eaten raw for treating gonorrhea (Compton, 1993). 

1 

SITKA ALDER 

Alnus viridis (Chaix) DC. ssp. 
sinuata (Regel) A. Löve & D. 

Löve 

Plant Symbol = ALVIS 

Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Corvallis, Oregon. 

Figure 1. Sitka alder leaves, current year's male catkins and 
previous and current year's female cones. Photo by Dale Darris.  

 

Alternate Names 
Green alder, mountain alder, wavy-leaf alder, slide 
alder, Alnus alnobetula, Alnus crispa ssp. laciniata, 
Alnus crispa ssp. sinuata, Alnus sinuata, Alnus viridis 
var. sinuata, and Duschekia sinuata (USDA NRCS, 
2011a). 
Uses 
Erosion control and reclamation: Sitka alder is a 
valuable shrub for slope and stream bank stabilization 
and general erosion control on disturbed, nutrient 
poor sites. It can be planted for acid, coal, placer, and 
copper mine spoil reclamation, soil enrichment, and 
other land rehabilitation efforts where an easy to 
establish, deciduous shrub is desired (Uchytil, 1989). 
The species may also be useful in hedgerows, the 
shrub row of field windbreaks, and other 
conservation buffers. 

Forestry: As host to symbiotic nitrogen fixing 
bacteria in its roots, Sitka alder is particularly 
important for improving forest site productivity and 
is sometimes used as a companion or nurse shrub in 

 

The inner bark or ointments made from it were used 
to treat skin problems such as wounds, skin ulcers, 
and swellings. Fresh scraped bark juice was applied 
to the skin to relieve itching from rash and a fresh 
infusion was made to treat poison ivy. The bark was 
also used for treating constipation, jaundice, and 
diarrhea. Leaf decoctions were used to treat burns 
and swollen wounds. Alder roots are high in tannins 
and were boiled and drunk as an astringent (Ellis et 
al., 1995).  A decoction of stems was apparently 
drunk as a remedy for colds or dried stems were 
placed in the nose or chewed for the same reason 
(Turner, et al., 1990).  

The catkins of Sitka alder can be eaten raw or cooked 
but have a bitter taste (Plants for a Future, 2011).  
Apparently, young buds and inner bark are edible as 
well, but the bark will cause vomiting if not dried or 
aged first (Elias et al., 1995; Plants for a Future, 
2011).  
 

 

Figure 2. Mature shrub row of Sitka alder at Corvallis, OR. Photo 
by Dale Darris. 

Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Description 
General: Sitka alder (Betulaceae family) is a 
deciduous shrub or small tree that grows to a height 
of 1-6 m (3-19 ft) in the mountains and 4-12 m (13-
39ft) at lower elevations.  Initially fast growing, its 
habit is freely branching at the base, upright to bent, 
and multi-stemmed with a rounded, open crown.  In 
the wild, crooked or leaning specimens are usually 
the result of avalanches, slides, or snowpress. Life 
expectancy is 25 to 50 years under typical growing 
conditions (Elias, 1980). 

The flowers are monecious with separate male and 
female catkins (aments; apetalous unisexual flowers) 
on the same plant. The staminate (male) 
inflorescence is naked (borne without bud scales), 
forms late in the growing season, opens the following 

 

 

spring, and turns from yellow-green to brown. When 
fully expanded they are slender, 8-14 cm (3.0-5.5 in) 
long, and drooping. Immature pistillate (female) 
catkins form by midsummer, remain enclosed within 
bud scales during winter, emerge the following 
spring, and occur in clusters of 3 to 6. At flowering 
they are 0.7-1.0 cm (0.3-0.4 in) long, later becoming 
woody, cone-like structures (strobili or strobiles) 
comprised of many leathery or woody scales.  Mature 
cones are 1.3-2.0 cm (0.5-0.8 in) long and half as 
thick, ovate to ovoid-ellipsoid in shape, and born on a 
slender peduncle. The fruit is a small nutlet (seed) 
with thin membranous wings that are twice the width 
of the seed (Elias, 1980; Hickman, 1993; Hitchcock 
et al., 1969).  

Unlike other alders, the catkins of Sitka alder open 
with the formation of the leaves as opposed to 
beforehand.  Flowering occurs in April, May, or June 
depending on elevation and latitude. Natural 
pollination is by wind.  This species produces seed 
primarily through outcrossing, but self pollination is 
possible as evidenced from controlled pollinations at 
Corvallis, OR. The cone and its seeds mature 
between mid-September and December (Harrington 
et al., 2008).   
 

 

Figure 3. Sitka alder male catkins (below leaves) and female 
catkins (above leaves) in flower (April). Photo by Dale Darris 

The branches are slender, glabrous, light brown to 
reddish brown or grey, and slightly zigzagged in 
appearance.  The older bark is thin and smooth grey 
to blue-grey in color.  Twigs are reddish to yellow 
brown, at first pubescent later becoming smooth with 
conspicuous lenticels (pores in the bark). The winter 
buds are sessile on new growth, 1.2-1.4 cm long (0.5-
.06 in), sharply acute, and covered with 3 to 6 
brownish-red to dark purple overlapping scales 
(Elias, 1980; Hickman, 1993; Hitchcock et al., 1969, 
Oregon State University, 2011).  
 

2 

 

Figure 4. Sketch of Sitka alder plant parts. Reprinted with 
permission, University of Washington Press. 

 

Leaves are alternate and the blades thin, sticky and 
fragrant when young, narrowly to broadly ovate, 7-14 
cm (2.8-5.5 in) long, and 3-10 cm (1.2-4.0 in) wide.  
They have a fine single or double serrate-denticulate 
to sinuate margin.  The leaf surfaces are glabrous 
except for hairs along the major vein axils, yellow-
green above, and slightly paler and shiny beneath.   
The base of the leaf is rounded to subcordate while 
the tip is acute to slightly acuminate.  The petiole is 
glabrous, 1.3-1.9 cm (0.5-0.8 in) long and grooved on 
the upper surface (Elias, 1980; Hickman, 1993; 
Hitchcock et al., 1969; Oregon State University, 
2011).  

The roots of Sitka alder form a highly fibrous system 
that aids in soil erosion control. They also develop 
beneficial symbiotic relationships with both 
ectomycorrhizal fungi and actinobacteria 
(actinomycetes) in the genus Frankia.  The latter 
association results in the formation of root nodules 
which are active sites for fixation of atmospheric 
nitrogen.  Contributions to soil nitrogen by Sitka 
alder in the Pacific Northwest have been estimated at 
20 to 150 kg N/ha (16-122 lbs/ac) per year (Binkley, 
1986).  

Distribution: In North America, Sitka alder occurs 
from southern and western Alaska and the Yukon 
southward to northern California and eastward to 
southwestern Alberta, western Montana, 
northwestern Wyoming, and Idaho.  It is one of three 
subspecies of Alnus viridis that form a circumpolar 
group distributed across northern North America, 
Asia, and Europe.  The other subspecies are A. viridis 
ssp. crispa and A. viridis ssp. fruticosa.  While Sitka 
alder can be found anywhere from sea level to above 

 

 

timberline (0-2745 m, 0-9000 ft), its most common 
occurrence is above 900 m (3000 ft) in the mountains 
(Elias, 1980; Hickman, 1993; Oregon State 
University, 2011; USDA Forest Service, 1988). It is 
rare to infrequent below 100 m (325 ft) in Oregon, 
Washington, and southern British Columbia. Sitka 
alder freely interbreeds with green alder (A. viridis 
ssp. fruticosa) and intermediate types can be found in 
British Columbia (Hauessler et al., 1990). For most 
current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 

 

Figure 5. Distribution map for Sitka alder in North America. 
Reproduced with permission, Flora of North American 
Association. 

 

Habitat: Sitka alder is a thicket forming, pioneer, 
early-seral, and mid-seral species.  It is well 
recognized as an ecologically important species for 
natural colonization and stabilization of landslide 
chutes, steep slopes, rock slides, stream banks, areas 
of flood deposition and scour, and exposed mineral 
soils following glacial retreat, avalanches, road 
building, logging, fire, soil slumping, and other 
drastic disturbances.  Typical habitat for Sitka alder 
includes moist montane woods, rocky or sandy coasts 
(Alaska), stream banks, bogs, fens, lakeshores, moist 
talus slopes, the edges of moist meadows, and the 
north face of rocky outcrops or other shady aspects 
(Elias, 1980; Hauessler et al., 1990; Mitchell, 1968, 
Uchytil, 1989). The species is usually found in full 
sun, but has intermediate shade tolerance and can 
persist under a forest canopy (DeLong and Sanborn, 
2000; Hauessler et al. 1990; Uchytil, 1989). 

Because of its wide occurrence, Sitka alder is 
associated with many woody plant communities. In 
the Cascades and Rocky Mountains, it is found 
within subalpine fir (Abies lasiocarpa), Pacific silver 
fir (Abies amabilis), western hemlock (Tsuga 
heterophylla) and western redcedar (Thuja plicata) 
forests (Uchytil, 1989). In Alaska, Sitka alder ranges 
3 

from low elevation wetland habitats where it may 
dominate or form the tall shrub layer in Lutz spruce 
(Picea x lutzii) forests (Gracz et al., 2008), to 
subalpine habitats where it can also form extensive 
stands or be found intermixed with herbaceous 
community types (Mitchell, 1968).  In interior British 
Columbia, Sitka alder is a common shrub component 
of lodgepole pine (Pinus contorta) communities 
(Delong and Sanborn, 2000).  
 

 

Figure 6. Thicket of Sitka alder with crooked stem at Talapus 
Lake, Cascade Mountains, WA, July 1991. ©Susan McDougall @ 
USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database. 

Adaptation: Sitka alder grows on soils that vary from 
infertile mineral to rich humus covered substrates, 
highly acidic to neutral pH (3.3-7.5), and coarse to 
medium texture (rocky, gravelly, loamy sands, sandy 
loams, silts, loams) (Hauessler et al., 1990; Mitchell, 
1968).  It also does well in heavier clay loam soils 
that are nutritionally poor but moist (Plants for a 
Future, 2011).   

Sitka alder can strongly influence the soil 
characteristics of the site it occupies. Because of 
nitrogen fixation within the root nodules, sites with 
established Sitka alder colonies generally have higher 
available soil nitrogen than adjacent plant 
communities (Haeussler and Coates, 1986; Hauessler 
et al., 1990).  Its abundant, nitrogen-rich leaf litter is 
also an important source of organic matter for soil 
building and nutrient cycling (Uchytil, 1989). The 
species also produces an acidifying effect on the soil 
(Hauessler et al., 1990).   

In some regions, Sitka alder and red alder occupy the 
same areas.  However, Sitka alder is more likely to be 
found on steep sites and those with well drained, 
rocky or coarse textured substrates while red alder 
occurs on swampy areas, moist floodplains, and 
poorly drained soils (Batzli and Dawson, 1997).  
While reported to be indicative of high water tables 
(Uchytil, 1989) and found along ponds, swamps, and 
other wet areas (Ellis, 1980), Sitka alder appears 
more maladapted to flooding compared to red alder.  
Unlike red alder, Sitka alder lost substantial root and 
shoot biomass and did not restore growth during 

 

 

flooding (20 days) or recovery periods (10 days) 
(Batzli and Dawson, 1997).  Others report that “Sitka 
alder prefers moist, relatively well drained soils but 
will grow on sites ranging from submesic to 
subhygric or possibly hygric.” [Submesic = water 
removed readily in relation to supply and available 
for moderately short periods following precipitation; 
hygric = water removed slowly enough to keep the 
soil wet for most of the growing season. Permanent 
seepage and mottling are present (Walmsley et al., 
1980)]. However, it’s not abundant on very wet sites 
with high water tables. The species is poorly adapted 
to drought (Haeussler et al., 1990).  

Natural regeneration: The seed of Sitka alder can 
travel long distances by wind or water (Uchytil, 
1989). Germination occurs between early spring and 
June on moist, exposed mineral soils following 
natural disturbances as well as logging and heavy 
burning. In the wild, Sitka alder also reproduces 
vegetatively by sprouting from damaged root collars 
or stumps.  Shoots can also form where roots are 
exposed in streams (Hauessler et al., 1990).   

Establishment 
Like other alders, Sitka alder can be established by 
direct seeding revegetation and reclamation sites, but 
ideal seeding rates are unknown. Physiological 
dormancy can be present in seed lots (Baskin and 
Baskin, 2002). Therefore, it is advisable for dry 
untreated seed to be planted in the fall on moist 
mineral seedbeds for best results. Seed should be 
covered with a thin layer of soil, mulch, or peat. 
Suggested sowing depths are similar to those used for 
other alders grown in bare-root nursery beds (2-5 
mm, 0.1-0.2 in) (Harrington et al., 2008). Results 
from Sitka alder seeding can be mixed and poor 
germination rates have been reported (Delong and 
Sanborn, 2000). 

If spring sowing of Sitka alder is preferred, it is 
suggested that stored seed be cold moist stratified 
(moist chilled) just prior to planting. However, the 
ideal length of time for chilling varies among reports. 
Seed dormancy for Sitka alder may differ by 
provenance, population, seed moisture content, 
storage history, or age of seed as it does with other 
alders (Harrington et al., 2008). Dry seed of Sitka 
alder can germinate at higher rates or more uniformly 
if it undergoes cold moist stratification for one to 
three months at 1-3ºC (34-38ºF) (Emery, 1988;  Wick 
et al., 2008).  Others report improved results with 
cold stratification periods for green or Sitka alder of 
14 days (Farmer et al., 1985), six (3-9) weeks 
(Forestry Commission, 2011), one month (McLean, 
1967), or  nine weeks (Darris et al., 1994).  

Pregermination seed treatments with fungicide 
(captan) and peroxide treatments may have a 

4 

beneficial effect by reducing pathogens present on 
the seed coat (Harrington et al., 2008).  However, 
fungicide treatment can also reduce germination 
(Darris et al., 1994).  Others soak the seed for 24 
hours prior to sowing and indicate no chilling 
treatment is required (Hudson and Carlson, 1998).  
Fresh seed can lack dormancy and may germinate 
without treatment if sown immediately on the soil 
surface or at a very shallow depth.   

Sitka alder can readily establish in the field using 
seedlings. Roots should be inoculated with Frankia 
bacteria by the producer and if possible, with an 
appropriate ectomycorrhizal fungus prior to or at 
outplanting. Stock type is typically container, but 
bare-root material in the range of 45-60 cm (18-24 in) 
tall may be used as well.  Indications of seedling 
quality such as high root to shoot ratio, the presence 
of root nodules, and stem caliper are as or more 
important than height.  Proper seedling selection, 
care, and handling, site preparation, planting 
techniques, vegetation management, and animal 
damage control measures generally described for 
establishing other woody plants should be observed 
(Darris, 2001; Elefritz et al., 1998; Hallman, 1993; 
Nolte and Otto, 1996; Rose and Morgan, 2000).  The 
best time to plant Sitka alder varies somewhat by 
region.  In western Oregon and western Washington, 
fall and early winter are preferred. Bare-root material 
is usually planted in late winter or early spring when 
stock is most available. 

For riparian buffer plantings or stream bank 
stabilization along low velocity streams, a suggested 
overall spacing of 1.2 m (4 ft)  is common (Voss, 
1997).  For effective erosion control on critical slopes 
and steep banks, a narrower spacing (0.6 m x 0.6 m, 2 
ft x 2 ft,  minimum 3 rows deep) similar to that used 
for smooth alder (Alnus serrulata) seedlings is 
advised (USDA NRCS, 2007). Plantings are also 
done in a grid fashion or clumps of three to five 
seedlings each. Recommended within-row spacing 
for windbreaks of medium to large sized shrubs like 
Sitka alder is 1.2 m (4 ft) for single rows and 1.8 m (6 
ft) for multiple rows (USDA Soil Conservation 
Service, 1991).   

Management 
Like most tree and shrub plantings, a monitoring and 
maintenance program for Sitka alder can be critical 
for successful establishment and growth.  The 
survival and condition of outplanted stock should be 
surveyed at least annually for the first three to five 
years.  Remedial measures may include replanting, 
weed control, and animal damage prevention.  
Specific guidelines for windbreak maintenance are 
described elsewhere. 

 

 

In forestry, one objective is to achieve balance 
between the benefits of nitrogen fixation and 
associated long term site productivity afforded by 
Sitka alder, and its competitive interactions with crop 
trees that reduce their growth (Simard and Nicholson, 
1990). Strategies include interplanting of alder and 
pine (Pinus spp.) at compatible densities or 
selectively removing or retaining established alder in 
young conifer plantations (Delong and Sandborn, 
2000). Some suggest species like Douglas-fir 
(Pseudotsuga menziesii) and Ponderosa pine (Pinus 
ponderosa) be planted several (2-6) years in advance 
of Sitka alder (Uchytil, 1989).   

The effect of alder density and brush cutting or 
removal on conifer growth is the subject of research 
and recommended densities or percent cover will 
vary by goal, climatic-vegetation zone, soil moisture 
regime, site productivity, timber species, and other 
factors. For instance, in the sub-boreal spruce (Picea 
spp.) zone of Canada, low priority should be given to 
controlling Sitka alder on submesic sites with 
lodgepole pine unless the density of alder is 
uniformly high (i.e., >45%) (Brockley and Sanborn, 
2003).  In another report, moderate levels of Sitka 
alder did not appear to inhibit diameter growth of 
lodgepole pine or spruce.  Results suggest that on 
mesic sites in the dry alder areas, brushing of Sitka 
alder is unnecessary for the release of lodgepole pine. 
Also, brushing is ineffective at reducing growth- 
limiting factors to spruce on wet alder sites (Simard 
et al., 2004). 

Pests and Potential Problems 
Sitka alder is susceptible to many of the same 
pathogens as red alder (Hepting, 1971).  Fungal 
pathogens include leaf spots, Septoria spot, branch 
and trunk cankers, heart rot, and powdery mildew.  
Leaf spot and mildew diseases may show up in 
seedling stock.  In red alder, top-kill caused by 
Bortrytis spp. and stem cankers caused by Septoria 
alnifolia  can cause significant loss in nursery yields, 
requiring multiple applications of fungicide during 
the growing season (Ahrens et al., 1992).   

Alders in general can be host to a number of insect 
pests including aphids, scales, borers, sawflies, and 
leaf miners (Furniss and Carolin, 1980, Johnson and 
Lyon, 1991).   Other common pests of Sitka alder are 
the alder leaf beetle (Altica ambiens), poplar-willow 
borer (Cryptorhynchus lapathi), and western tent 
caterpillar (Malacosoma californicum) (Hauessler et 
al., 1990).   
Several insect pests were observed on seedlings or 
mature shrubs growing at Corvallis, OR.  The black 
vine root weevil (Otiorhynchus sulcatus) 
occasionally proved troublesome during 
containerized nursery production of Sitka alder.   

5 

The grub-like larvae feed on roots while adult beetles 
create a notched appearance on the margin of the 
leaves.  Insecticidal soil drenches or parasitic 
nematodes can be useful in managing root weevil 
larvae, while approved foliar applied insecticides 
may be necessary for adult weevil control.  Timing is 
critical in order to match treatment with the insect’s 
life cycle (DeAngelis and Garth, 1993; Rosetta, 
2010).  Oyster shell scale (Lepidosaphes ulmi) and 
poplar-willow borer were two other pests noted in the 
mature specimens at Corvallis.  Scales can be treated 
with a dormant oil spray.  Borers are controlled by 
cutting and destroying infested limbs.  

Always read label and safety instructions for each 
pest control method.  Trade names and control 
measures appear in this document only to provide 
specific information.  USDA NRCS does not 
guarantee or warranty the products and control 
methods named, and other products may be equally 
effective. 

Environmental Concerns 
Alders produce considerable windborne pollen with 
allergenic activity. Sitka alder pollen is classified as a 
moderate allergen and like other alders, may have 
cross-reactivity with pollen from other plants (e.g. 
birch and hazel). The result can be hay fever (allergic 
rhinitis) and atopic dermatitis in humans (Smith et 
al., 2007). Livestock poisoning from plant parts has 
not been reported. 

Sitka alder can increase after overstory tree removal 
and readily volunteer on disturbed sites such as 
recently logged and burned over forestland.  
Therefore, in some reforestation efforts it is 
considered a minor to major competitor with conifer 
tree seedlings and an obstacle for plantation 
establishment and growth (Coates et al., 1990; 
Hauessler et al., 1990, Uchytil, 1989). Colonization 
along roadsides and utility right-of-ways may also 
necessitate control. 

Control 
Brushing is sometimes used to set back or control 
Sitka alder in conifer stands and right-of-ways when 
density or growth becomes too high.  Brushing is 
defined as the “removal of undesirable herbaceous 
and woody vegetation by manual or mechanical 
means” (Canadian Forest Service, 1995). The species 
can sprout new shoots after cutting so more than one 
treatment may be needed for conifer release (B.C. 
Ministry of Forests, 1997). For Alnus viridis, July and 
August cutting results in the least sprouting and 
lowest height of new growth (Harvey et al., 1998).  

Other methods of control alone or in combination 
with cutting can be effective. Foliar applied 
herbicides such as glyphosate, triclopyr, and 2,4-D 

 

 

can give good control (B.C. Ministry of Forests, 
1997; Coates et al., 1990).  Triclopyr can also be used 
for stump and basal bark treatments. Hack and squirt 
(herbicide) and girdling methods are inappropriate 
because of Sitka alder’s multi-stemmed growth habit 
(B.C. Ministry of Forests, 1997). A native fungal 
pathogen (Chondrostereum purpureum) has been 
approved in Canada as a biological control alternative 
to the use of glyphosate and triclopyr herbicides.  The 
agent is applied as a paste to re-sprouting stumps of 
red and Sitka alder following manual cutting (Health 
Canada, 2007).  Moderate burns are listed as a 
control treatment (Coates et al., 1990), but the species 
can also be favored by fire (Hauessler et al., 1990).  
Brown (using glyphosate) and burn treatments are 
effective (Coates et al., 1990).  Sheep grazing is not 
suggested because Sitka alder is not effectively 
browsed (B.C. Ministry of Forests, 1997). 

Please contact your local forester, extension 
specialist, or county weed specialist to learn what 
treatments are legal and work best in your area and 
how to use them safely.  Always read label and safety 
instructions for each control method. Trade names 
and control measures appear in this document only to 
provide specific information.  USDA NRCS does not 
guarantee or warranty the products and control 
methods named, and other products may be equally 
effective. 

Seed and Plant Production 
Seed production: Sitka alder seed can be obtained 
from natural stands or seed orchards.  The species 
commences flowering and producing seed at an age 
of four (6) to seven (8) years (Hauessler et al., 1990; 
Uchytil, 1989).  However, populations grown under 
cultivation at Corvallis, OR, flowered as early as age 
three.  Plants will produce seed every year with a 
bumper crop occurring every three to five years 
(Hauessler et al., 1990). Seed orchards are best 
established in full sun on moist, well drained sites 
with coarse to medium textured soils that are mildly 
acidic.  Selections should be properly isolated from 
other subspecies and populations of both Alnus 
viridis and Alnus crispa. For seed certification of 
native and naturalized plants in Oregon, the standard 
minimum distance apart for cross pollinated species 
including Sitka alder is 275 m (900 ft). 

Summer irrigation beyond the establishment year 
may be desirable on dryer sites especially if plants 
are not mulched.  Insect and disease pests should be 
monitored and if necessary treated with approved 
integrated pest management (IPM) methods as 
required, according to label and safety instructions.   

Methods for collection, extraction, and storage of red 
alder seed are generally applicable to Sitka alder. The 
seed is collected in fall or early winter when the 

6 

female cones (strobiles) turn brown and scales begin 
to open.  Seed may also be sufficiently mature if the 
cones are turning brown in color and their scales 
easily separate by twisting the cone at the top and 
bottom (Hibbs and Ager, 1989).  They can be hand 
harvested or the branches flailed over a tarp. The 
cones are thoroughly dried at ambient temperatures 
by suspending them in fine mesh bags or placing 
them on elevated screens.  Some of the seed will fall 
out during drying with the remainder removed by 
tumbling or shaking. Red alder and presumably Sitka 
alder cones can also be kiln dried at 16-27°C (60-
80°F) for two to seven days for quicker extraction 
(Hibbs and Ager, 1989).  Seed can be cleaned with an 
air screen machine and processed through an air 
column to remove small extraneous particles 
(Harrington et al., 2008). At the NRCS Corvallis 
Plant Materials Center (PMC), 95 cones yielded 27 g 
(~1 oz.) of clean seed. Data on seeds per pound vary 
widely, ranging from 1,467,000 seeds/kg (666,000 
seeds/lb) (USDA NRCS, 2011b) to 3,740,000 
seeds/kg (1,700,000 seeds/lb). Differences may be 
genetic, environmental, or related to the amount of 
good versus empty seed which is hard to determine. 

Seed of Alnus viridis is classified as orthodox 
meaning it can be collected and stored dry with little 
loss of viability (Forestry Commission, 2011). When 
Sitka alder seed was stored in paper envelopes and 
refrigerated at 3-5°C (37-41°F) at Corvallis, OR, it 
maintained a germination rate of over 50% after three 
years.  Red alder seed has been preserved for longer 
periods (10-20 years) without substantial loss in 
viability when dried to less than 10%  moisture 
content and frozen in moisture proof containers at  
minus 12ºC (10°F) (Hibbs and Ager, 1989).  
Appropriate conditions for storage of Alnus viridis 
seeds are 8 to 10 percent moisture content at less than 
4°C (39°F) (Forestry Commission, 2011).  

Vegetative propagation: Hardwood cuttings of Sitka 
alder did not root in one study (Java and Everett, 
1992), but others report success with spring or fall 
planted hardwood cuttings on wet sites (DeLong and 
Sandborn, 2000).  Rooting success has been reported 
with green stem cuttings (Carpenter et al., 1984).  
Cuttings were dipped in a solution of 2000 ppm IBA 
(indole-3-butyric acid) and dusted with a mixture of 
Rootone 10 rooting compound and fungicide.  The 
rooting medium was sterile perlite and vermiculite 
(1:1).  They were then misted intermittently for 10 
weeks and fertilized weekly with a liquid fertilizer 
during the last month.  Results improved by applying 
bottom heat of 21°C (70°F).  Others report some 
success rooting cuttings that are taken just after the 
leaves fall and planted outdoors in a sandy soil 
(Plants for a Future, 2011).   At Corvallis, OR, 
summer wood cuttings made in July and treated with 
hormones were unsuccessful.   

 

 

Field grafting has been reported for certain cultivars 
of alder, but the process is generally difficult for this 
genus.  The Corvallis PMC experimented with a 
device for hot-callusing graft unions of dormant stock 
but was unsuccessful (Darris et al., 1994).  The 
species has been propagated successfully using tissue 
culture (Tremblay and Lalonde, 1984).   

Container production: Sitka alder is readily adapted 
to container nursery production (Hudson and Carlson, 
1998; Wick et al., 2008) both in a greenhouse and 
outdoor beds. Plants grown in larger containers have 
better outplanting performance (Harrington et al., 
2008). The use of standard growing media that are 75 
to 100 % peat, moderate to well drained, and 
amended with micronutrients and slow release 
fertilizer is suggested. Unless fall sown, the use of 
stratified seed is recommended. Given the 
requirement of light for germination, seed should be 
surface sown or covered with a very thin layer of 
silica sand in pots.  Germination usually occurs 
within three weeks (Corvallis PMC propagation 
notes; Wick et al., 2008).  Depending on the original 
container size, seedlings may be re-potted into 1- 
gallon or larger pots within a period of 12 to 18 
weeks.  

Container plants can be maintained in a shadehouse 
with periodic fertilization and irrigation. Some 
growers apply a balanced soluble fertilizer one or 
more times in the spring and early summer.  A fall 
hardening phase may mean discontinuation or 
reduction of fertilizer and a reduction of water as 
early as August. Pruning, if needed, is done one or 
more times on soft tissue before mid-August (Hudson 
and Carlson, 1998). 

Seedling inoculation: For optimal growth and 
improved root nodulation, young seedlings or 
growing media should be inoculated with the 
appropriate Frankia actinobacteria using cultured 
isolates or dilute slurry made from water and 
macerated nodules (Ahrens, 1994; Quoreshi et al., 
2007; Subramaniam et al., 1991).  Superior cultures 
can be raised on a special medium, harvested by 
centrifugation, homogenized, suspended in distilled 
water and applied to four-week-old seedlings as a soil 
drench (Subramaniam et al., 1991). Others suggest 
the inoculum be mixed with a carrier like peat and 
incorporated into the potting media or nursery beds 
(Martin et al., 1985).  It has been demonstrated that 
container grown green alder can be successfully 
inoculated with Frankia under commercial nursery 
conditions without changing normal operational 
schedules.  Unfortunately, commercial sources of 
inoculum are generally unavailable (Quoreshi et al., 
2007).   

7 

Frankia can be obtained from fresh nodules growing 
on the roots of donor plants, though this method is 
less reliable and the extracted strain would be 
unknown. The nodules are rinsed thoroughly with tap 
water, then crushed, ground, or macerated, 
homogenized in a blender, and stored as slurry in a 
refrigerator for a short period until used.  The 
homogenate may be filtered through muslin, diluted 
with water, and then applied to containerized 
seedlings at four weeks or a seedbed prior to sowing 
(Wheeler et al., 1991; Ahrens et al., 1992).   
 
Soil obtained beneath the canopy of existing Sitka 
alder stands or from a makeshift inoculum bed of 
older, nodulated seedlings is a third source of 
Frankia.  Work at the Corvallis PMC confirmed that 
a thin band of this soil (dried and sifted) placed in the 
container prior to sowing, coupled with periodic 
application of a balanced liquid fertilizer or 
incorporation of a slow-release fertilizer, can produce 
the most vigorous seedlings (Darris et al., 1994). Low 
to moderate rates of nitrogen fertilization promote the 
formation of the nitrogen-fixing nodules (Harrington 
et al., 2008). 

Sitka alder will also respond positively to inoculation 
with certain species of beneficial ectomycorrhizal 
fungi (Hudson and Carlson, 1998). Procedures for 
precise fungal inoculation of the root system are 
described elsewhere (Castellano and Molina, 1989). 
Companies also produce and sell fungal associates 
that may function well with Sitka alder.  The 
manufacturer’s experts should be consulted. In some 
instances, soil borrowed from existing stands of Sitka 
alder may suffice at outplanting.  

Bare-root production: Sitka alder has been 
successfully produced as 1+0 and plug+1 bare-root 
stock in outdoor nursery beds. [1+0 (1-0) stock are 1- 
year old seedlings grown in one location before 
lifting. Plug+1 (P+1, P-1) stock are seedlings started 
in small cavity containers then transplanted after six 
months to a year into a nursery bed where they are 
grown for another year]. Seedlings grown in 
fumigated beds have benefited from inoculation with 
Frankia just prior to seeding. While alder species can 
be successfully fall seeded, most nurseries sow in the 
spring (Harrington et al., 2008). Presumably treated 
(stratified) seed is used for improved germination.  
Open bed seedling densities of 60-180 seedlings/m2 
(5-15/ft2) recommended for other alders should also 
work for Sitka alder. Management of top growth, 
timing (sowing, lifting, etc.) and grading of seedlings 
will likely differ by alder species, climate, and 
nursery.  However, general guidelines for nursery 
culture including methods of bed inoculation with 
Frankia, sowing, fertilization, irrigation, pest 
management, transplanting, and storage developed 
for the production of red alder (Ahrens, 1994; Ahrens 

 

 

et al., 1992; Harrington et al., 2008) are adaptable to 
Sitka alder.     

 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Skamania Germplasm is a selected class pre-variety 
of Sitka alder that originates from a natural stand 
growing above the north shore of the Columbia 
River, in the vicinity of Beacon Rock in Skamania 
County, WA. It was released in 2006 by the USDA 
Natural Resources Conservation Service, Corvallis, 
OR, in cooperation with the Agricultural Experiment 
Stations of Oregon and Washington. While this 
species of alder is more common at mid to sub-alpine 
elevations, Skamania Germplasm represents a high 
quality seed source from, and for use at, lower 
elevation. Recommended applications include stream 
bank stabilization, reclamation of disturbed lands, 
soil improvement of forestlands, and conservation 
buffers (windbreaks, hedgerows). Suggested area of 
use is western Washington and western Oregon 
below an elevation of 457 m (1500 ft) (Darris et al., 
2002).  
 

 

Figure 7.  Bare-root nursery bed of Skamania Germplasm Sitka 
alder seedlings at former Washington DNR Nursery, Bow, WA. 
Photo by Dale Darris. 

Genetic differences among seed sources or 
provenances of Sitka alder have been demonstrated.  
A study in British Columbia with 28 populations of 
Sitka alder showed clear geographic patterns in frost 
hardiness, dry weight, growth, and germination 
parameters that related to latitude and distance from 
the coast (Benowicz et al., 2000).  The differences 
are probably adaptive (Centre for Forest Gene 
Conservation, 2011).  At present, there are no 
published seed zones or seed transfer guidelines for 
this species.  In such cases, some suggest US EPA 
Level III ecoregions can be used as surrogate seed 
transfer zones (Withrow-Robinson and Johnson, 
2006).  As with most endemic plant species, careful 
attention should be paid to the natural origin of the 
seed or nursery stock (longitude, latitude, elevation, 
soil, and climate) and how well it is projected to 
perform at the planting site. Sitka alder seedlings are 

8 

produced by a number of nurseries in the western US 
and Canada. 

References 
Ahrens, G.R., A. Dobkowski, and D.E. Hibbs. 1992. 
Red alder: guidelines for successful regeneration. 
Special publication 24. Forest Research 
Laboratory, Oregon State University, Corvallis, 
OR.   

Ahrens, G.R. 1994. Seedling quality and nursery 

practices for red alder. In: D.E. Hibbs, D.S. 
DeBell, and R.F Tarrant (editors). The Biology 
and Management of Red Alder. Oregon State 
University Press, Corvallis, OR. 

Agar, T.A. and L.P. Agar. 1980. Ethnobotany of the 

Eskimos of Nelson Island, Alaska. Arctic 
Anthropology 27:26-48.  

Anderson, J. P. 1939. Plants used by the Eskimo of 
the Northern Bering Sea and Arctic Regions of 
Alaska. Am. J. Bot. 26:714-16. 

B.C. Ministry of Forests. 1997. Operational summary 

for vegetation management dry alder complex. 
Forest Practices Branch, Ministry of Forests, 
Province of British Columbia, Victoria, BC. 
Baskin, C.C. and J.M. Baskin. 2002. Propagation 

protocol for production of container Alnus viridis 
(Chaix) DC plants; University of Kentucky, 
Lexington, Kentucky. In: Native Plant Network. 
[http://www.nativeplantnetwork.org (accessed 30 
August 2011)]. Moscow (ID): University of 
Idaho, College of Natural Resources, Forest 
Research Nursery. 

  Batzli, J. McCray and J.O. Dawson. 1997. 

Physiological and morphological responses of red 
alder and Sitka alder to flooding. Physiologia 
Plantarum 99: 653-663. 

 Benowicz, A., Y.A. El-Kassaby, R.D. Guy, and C.C. 

Ying. 2000. Sitka alder (Alnus sinuata Rydb.) 
genetic diversity in germination, frost hardiness, 
and growth attributes. Silvae Genetica 49: 206-
212.  

Binkley, D. 1986. Forest nutrition management. 

Wiley, New York.  

Brockley, R.P. and P. Sanborn. 2003. Effects of Sitka 
alder on the growth and foliar nutrition of young 
lodgepole pine in the central interior of British 
Columbia. Can. J. For. Res. 33: 1761-1771. 

Canadian Forest Service. 1995. Silvicultural terms in 
Canada. Second Edition. Policy, Economics and 
International Affairs Directorate. Natural 
Resources Canada. Canadian Forest Service. 
Ottawa, ON. 

Carpenter, C.V., L.R. Robertson, J.C. Gordon, and 

D.A. Perry. 1984. The effect of four new Frankia 
isolates on growth and nitrogenase activity in 
clones of Alnus rubra and Alnus sinuata. Can. J. 
For. Res. 14:701-706. 

Castellano, M.A. and R. Molina. 1989. 

Mychorrhizae. In: T.D. Landis, R.W. Tinus, S.E. 

 

 

McDonald, and J.P. Barnett. The Container Tree 
Nursery Manual. Volume 5. Agriculture 
Handbook 674. USDA Forest Service, 
Washington D.C.  

Centre for Forest Conservation Genetics. 2011. Sitka 
alder (Alnus viridis (Chaix.) D. C.) University of 
British Columbia, Vancouver, BC. 
[http://genetics.forestry.ubc.ca/cfcg/proj_catalogu
ing/s_alnuvir.html] 

Coates, D., S. Haeussler, and J. Mather. 1990. A 

guide to the response of common plants in British 
Columbia to management treatments.  FRDA 
Handbook 008. British Columbia Ministry of 
Forests, Victoria, BC.   

Compton, B.D. 1993. Upper North Wakashan and 

Southern Tsimshian ethnobotany: the knowledge 
and usage of plants and fungi among the 
Oweekeno, Hanaksiala (Kitlope and Kemano), 
Haisla (Kitamaat) and Kitasoo peoples of the 
central and north coasts of British Columbia.  
Ph.D. Dissertation, University of British 
Columbia. Vancouver, BC. 

Darris, D.C. 2001. Tips for planting trees and shrubs: 

revegetation and landscaping. Plant Materials 
Technical Note No. 3. USDA Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Portland, OR.  

Darris, D.C, T.R. Flessner, and J.D. Conrod Trindle. 
1994. Corvallis Plant Materials Center Technical 
Report: plant materials for streambank 
stabilization 1980-1992.  USDA Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Portland, OR.  
 Darris, D.C, R. Tracey, and S. Lambert. 2002. Fact 

sheet on Skamania Germplasm Sitka alder. 
USDA-NRCS, Plant Materials Center, Corvallis, 
OR. 

DeAngelis, J. and G. Garth. 1993.  Management of 
root weevils in the nursery and landscape. The 
Digger.  Oregon Association of Nurseries, 
Wilsonville, OR.  

DeLong, C. and P. Sanborn. 2000. Management of 
Sitka alder and willows: a strategy to minimize 
loss of habitat and maximize benefit to long term 
soil productivity. Forest Research Note No. PG-
22. Forest Resources and Practices Team, 
Ministry of Forests, Prince George, BC.  

Elefritz, M, M.M. Atkinson, and S.A. Fitzgerald. 

1998. The care and planting of tree seedlings on 
your woodland. EC 1504. Oregon State 
University Extension Service, Corvallis, OR. 

Elias, T.S. 1980. The complete trees of North 

America. Book Division, Times Mirror 
Magazines, Inc. (publisher), Van Nostrand 
Reinhold Company, New York (distributor).  

Elias S., E. Ottoni, N. Verma, D. Kreuger, S. Roburn, 
and C. Wulff. 1995. An ethnobotany of the UBC 
Arboretum.  University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, B.C. Adapted for the web 1998.  
[http://www.botany.ubc.ca/facilities/arboretum]   

9 

Emery, D.E. 1988. Seed propagation of native 

California plants. Santa Barbara Botanic Garden, 
Santa Barbara, CA.  

Farmer, R.E., M.L. Maley, M.U. Stoehr, and F. 

Schnedenburger. 1985. Reproductive 
characteristics of green alder in northwestern 
Ontario. Can. J. Bot. 63: 2243-2247. 

Forestry Commission. 2011. Seed storage and pre-

treatment for Alnus viridis. Great Britain. 
[http://www.forestry.gov.uk/fr/INFD-7FAB3P] 

Furniss, R.L. and V.M. Carolin. 1980. Western forest 

insects. Miscellaneous publication No. 1339. 
USDA Forest Service. U.S. Government Printing 
Office, Washington, D.C.   

Gracz, M. et al. 2008. Wetland classification of the 

Kenai Peninsula lowlands, Alaska. Kenai 
Watershed Forum. Fritz Creek, AK.  The Alaska 
Natural Heritage Program, University of Alaska, 
Anchorage, AK. 
[http://www.kenaiwetlands.net/plant_community
_classification_i.htm] 

Hallman, R. 1993. Reforestation equipment. 9324-

2837-MTDC. Technology and Development 
Program, USDA Forest Service, Missoula, MT.  
Harrington, C.A. and R.L. Deal. 1982. Sitka alder, a 
candidate for mixed stands. Can. J. For. Res. 12 
(1): 108-111. 

Harrington et al. 2008. Alnus P. Mill. alder. In: F.T. 
Bonner and R.P. Karrfalt (editors). The Woody 
Plant Seed Manual. Agriculture Handbook 727. 
USDA Forest Service, Washington, D.C. 

Harvey, E.M., F.W. Bell, and J.O. Boateng. 1998. 

Manual, motor–manual and mechanical brushing 
tools for conifer release. Northwest Science and 
Technology Technical Note TN–42.  In: F.W. 
Bell, M. McLaughlan and J. Kerley (compilers). 
Vegetation Management Alternatives – A Guide 
to Opportunities. Ontario Ministry of Natural 
Resources, Thunder Bay, ON. 

Hauessler, S. and D. Coates. 1986. Autecological 
characteristics of selected species that compete 
with conifers in British Columbia: a literature 
review. Land Management Report No. 33. 
Ministry of Forests, Information Services Branch, 
Victoria, BC.  

Hauessler, S., D. Coates, and J. Mather. 1990. 

Autecology of common plants in British 
Columbia: a literature review. FRDA Report 158. 
Forestry Canada and B.C. Ministry of Forests, 
Victoria, BC. 

Health Canada. 2007. Registration decision. 

Chondrostereum purpureum strain PFC2139 Cp-
PFC2139 Chontrol Paste. Pest Management 
Regulatory Agency, Ottawa, ON. 

Healy, W.M. and J.D. Gill. 1974. Alders. In: J.D. Gill 

and W.M. Healy (compilers). Shrubs and vines 
for Northeastern Wildlife. General Technical 
Report NE-9.USDA Forest Service. Northeastern 
Forest Experimental Station, Upper Darby, PA. 

 

 

 

Hepting, G.H. 1971. Diseases of forest and shade 

trees of the United States. Agriculture Handbook 
386. USDA Forest Service.  U.S. Government 
Printing Office, Washington D.C.   

Hibbs, D.E. and A.A. Ager. 1989.  Red alder: 
guidelines for seed collection, handling and 
storage. Special Publication 18. Forest Research 
Laboratory, Oregon State University, Corvallis, 
OR. 

Hickman, J.C. (editor). 1993. The Jepson Manual, 

higher plants of California. University of 
California Press. Berkeley, Los Angeles, and 
London. 

Hitchcock, C.L., et al. 1969. Vascular Plants of the 

Pacific Northwest.  Part 2: salicaceae to 
saxifragaceae. University of Washington Press.  
Seattle and London.   

Hudson, S. and M. Carlson. 1998. Propagation of 

interior British Columbia native plants from seed. 
British Columbia Ministry of Forests, Research 
Program. Kalamalka Forestry Centre, Vernon, 
BC.   

Java, B.J. and R.L. Everett. 1992. Rooting hardwood 
cuttings of Sitka alder and thinleaf alder. In: W.P. 
Cleary, E.D. McArthur, D. Bedunah, and C.L. 
Wambolt (compilers). Proceedings-Symposium 
on Ecology and Management of Riparian Shrub 
Communities, Sun Valley, ID, May 1991. USDA 
Forest Service. Intermountain Research Station, 
Ogden, UT.  

Johnson, W.T. and H.H. Lyon. 1991.  Insects that 
feed on trees and shrubs. Comstock Publishing 
Associates, Cornell University Press, Ithaca, NY, 
and London.   

Martin, K.J., Y. Tanaka, and D.D. Myrold. 1991. 
Peat carrier increases inoculation success with 
Frankia on red alder (Alnus rubra Bong.) in 
fumigated nursery beds. New Forests 5: 43-50. 

Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, and A.L. Nelson. 1951.  

American wildlife and plants: a guide to wildlife 
food habits. Dover Publications, Inc. New York.  

McLean, A. 1967. Germination of forest range 

species from southern British Columbia. J. Range 
Manage. 20: 321-322. 

Mitchell, W. W. 1968. On the ecology of Sitka alder 
in the subalpine zone of south-central Alaska. In: 
J.M. Trappe, J.F. Franklin, R.F. Tarrant, and 
G.M. Hansen (editors). Biology of alder: 
Proceedings of a symposium; 1967 April 14-15; 
Pullman, WA. Portland, OR: USDA Forest 
Service, Pacific Northwest Forest and Range 
Experiment Station.   

Nolte, D.L. and I.J. Otto. 1996. Materials and 

supplies for management of wildlife damage to 
trees. Technical Report 9624-2808-MTCS. 
USDA Forest Service, Missoula Technology and 
Development Center, Missoula, MT.  

 

10 

Oregon State University. 2011.  Alnus sinuata. In: 

Landscape Plants images, identification and 
information. Volume 1. Oregon State University. 
Corvallis, OR.  
[http://oregonstate.edu/dept/ldplants/alsin.htm] 
Pierce, J.D. 1984. Shiras moose forage selection in 
relation to browse availability in north-central 
Idaho. Can. J. Zoology. 62: 2404-2409. 

Plants for a Future. 2011. Alnus sinuata (Regel.) 
Rydb. Species database. Plants for a Future.  
Great Britain.  
[http://www.pfaf.org/user/Plant.aspx?LatinName
=Alnus+sinuata]  

Quoreshi, A.M. et al. 2007. Inoculation of green alder 

(Alnus crispa) with Frankia-ectomycorrhizal 
fungal inoculant under commercial nursery 
production conditions. Native Plants Journal 8:(3) 
271-281. 

Rose, R. and P. Morgan. 2000. Guide to reforestation 

in western Oregon. Oregon Department of 
Forestry and College of Forestry. Oregon State 
University, Corvallis, OR.  

Rosetta, R. 2010. Nursery pests. In: Hollingsworth, 

C.S. (editor). 2011. Pacific Northwest Insect 
Management Handbook. Oregon State University, 
Corvallis, OR.  [http://uspest.org/pnw/insects] 
Rousseau, J. 1945. Le Folklore Botanique De L'ile 

Aux Coudres. Contributions de l'Institut 
botanique l'Universite de Montreal 55:75-111. 

Simard, S.W., and A. Nicholson. 1990. Balancing the 

positive and negative effects of non-crop plants 
on conifers: pinegrass, fireweed, Sitka alder and 
paper birch. In: E. Hamilton, E. Vegetation 
Management: An Integrated Approach, Proc. of 
the Fourth Annual Vegetation Management 
Workshop, Nov. 14-16, 1989. B.C. Ministry of 
Forests, Victoria, BC. FRDA Report No. 109: 45-
48.  

Simard, S. W, J. L. Heineman, S.M. Hagerman, W. J. 
Mather, and D. L. Sachs. 2004. Manual cutting of 
Sitka alder-dominated plant communities: effects 
on conifer growth and plant community structure. 
West. J. Appl. For. 19(4):277–287. 

Smith, M. et al. 2007. Regional importance of Alnus 
pollen as an aeroallergen: a comparative study of 
Alnus pollen counts from Worcester (UK) and 
Pozan (Poland).  Ann. Agric. Environ. Med. 
14:123-128.  

Subramaniam, P., I.R. Miller, and D. Burgess. 1991. 

Production of Frankia inoculated Sitka alder 
(Alnus viridis ssp. sinuata (Reg.) Love & Love) 
container stock.  In: F.P. Donnelly and H.W. 
Lussenburg (compilers), Proc. of the 11th Annual 
Conference of the Forest Nursery Association of 
British Columbia, September, 1991. 

Tremblay, F.M. and M. Lalonde. 1984. Requirements 

for in vitro propagation of seven nitrogen-fixing 
alder species. Plant Cell Tissue Organ Culture 
3:189-199. 

 

 

Turner, N.J., L.C. Thompson, M.T. Thompson, and 

A.Z. York. 1990. Thompson ethnobotany.  
Knowledge and usage of plants by the Thompson 
Indians of British Columbia. Memoir No. 3. 
Royal British Columbia Museum, Victoria, BC. 

Uchytil, R.J. 1989. Alnus viridis subsp. sinuata.  

In: Fire Effects Information System, [Online].  
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fire Sciences 
Laboratory (Producer). Available. 
[http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/(2011, 
September 1)] 

USDA Forest Service. 1988. Range plant handbook. 

Dover Publications, Inc., New York.  Reprint. 
U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington 
D.C. 1937.   

USDA NRCS. 2007. ‘Panbowl’ River Alder Alnus 
serrulata.  Release brochure. Appalachian Plant 
Materials Center. Alderson, WV.  

USDA NRCS. 2011a. The PLANTS Database 
[http://plants.usda.gov, 1 September 2011]. 
National Plant Data Team, Greensboro, NC. 

USDA NRCS. 2011b. Conservation plant 

characteristics for Alnus viridis ssp. sinuata. The 
PLANTS Database [http://plants.usda.gov, 1 
September 2011]. National Plant Data Team, 
Greensboro, NC. 

 USDA Soil Conservation Service. 1991. Windbreak 

handbook. Portland, OR and Spokane, WA. 

Voss, C.  1997. A guide to stream corridor 
revegetation in Western Washington.  
Washington State Department of Ecology and 
Thurston Conservation District, Olympia, WA.   
Walmsley, M., Utzig, G., T. Vold, D. Moon, and J. 

van Barneveld (editors). 1980. Describing 
ecosystems in the field. Land Management Report 
7. Ministry of Forests, Victoria: BC.  

Wheeler, C.T., M.K. Hollingsworth, J.E. Hooker, 

J.D. McNeill, W.L. Mason, A.J. Moffat, and L.J. 
Sheppard. 1991. The effect of inoculation with 
either cultured Frankia or crushed nodules on 
nodulation and growth of Alnus rubra and Alnus 
glutinosa seedlings in Forest Nurseries. For. Ecol. 
Manage. 43:153-166. 

Wick, D., T. Luna, and J. Hosokawa. 2008. 

Propagation protocol for production of container 
Alnus viridis (Chaix.) DC. sinuata (Regel) Love 
& Love plants (172 ml containers); USDI NPS - 
Glacier National Park, West Glacier, Montana. In: 
Native Plant Network. 
[http://www.nativeplantnetwork.org (accessed 30 
August 2011)]. Moscow (ID): University of 
Idaho, College of Natural Resources, Forest 
Research Nursery. 

Withrow-Robinson, B. and R. Johnson, 2006. 

Selecting native plant materials for restoration 
projects. Publication EM 8885-E. Oregon State 
University, Corvallis, OR.   

11 

 

Prepared By: Dale C. Darris 
USDA-NRCS Plant Materials Center  
Corvallis, Oregon 

Citation 
Darris, D.C. 2011. Plant guide for Sitka alder (Alnus 
viridis ssp. sinuata). USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Plant Materials Center. 
Corvallis, OR  97330. 

Published September, 2011 

Edited: 09Sept2011 jab, 09Sept2011 klp 

For more information about this and other plants, 
please contact your local NRCS field office or 
Conservation District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ 
and visit the PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant Materials Program 
Web site http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or 
availability of other Web sites. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

12 

