 

 

Plant Guide

seed drops from the plant, animals will return to grazing 
it. The vegetation typically retains some green into fall 
and winter and will be grazed by deer and elk late in the 
season (Monsen et al. 2004).  It is a significant component 
of the diet of pocket gophers and provides some cover for 
birds and small mammals (Zouhar, 2000). 

Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Description 
Columbia needlegrass is a native perennial bunchgrass 
with culms typically ranging from 30 to 60 cm (12 to 24 
in) tall but larger specimens approaching 3 m (6 ft) tall 
have been documented (Welsh et al. 2003). The leaves are 
mostly basal with blades flat to rolled, 0.5-5 mm (0.02 to 
0.2 in) wide. The purple tinged inflorescence is a narrow 
panicle with erect or strongly ascending branches. 
Lemmas average 5 to 7 mm (0.2 to 0.3 in) long and are 
covered with appressed hairs. The joint between the awn 
and the lemma is typically obscured by the apical hairs. 
The awn is twice geniculate (bent) and ranges 20 to 30 
mm (0.8 to 1.2 in) in length. The callus is 0.7 to 3 mm 
(0.03 to 0.1 in) long and can be curved or acute (Welsh et 
al. 2003).  

Distribution:   
Columbia needlegrass occurs in western North America 
going as far east as Saskatchewan and Texas. For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site. 

Habitat:  This species can be found at higher elevations, 
from 1,640 m (5,000 ft) to 2,400 m (8,000 ft) in openings 
in upper sagebrush zones, mountain brush, pinyon-juniper 
and aspen-fir communities. It has been known to form 
dense stands on open hillsides.  

 

Adaptation 
Columbia needlegrass occurs in areas receiving 380 mm 
(15 in) or more mean annual precipitation. The species is 
adapted to well-drained fine textured soils but can grow 
on a number of soil types from sandy loams to clay loams 
and even rocky, infertile soils (Monsen et al. 2004). It is 
moderately saline tolerant. This species is a good native 
alternative in areas typically seeded to intermediate 
wheatgrass (Thinopyrum intermedium) and smooth brome 
(Bromus inermis) (Monsen et al. 2004). 
 
 

COLUMBIA 

NEEDLEGRASS 

Achnatherum nelsonii (Scribn.) 

Barkworth 

Plant Symbol = ACNE9 

Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Idaho Plant Materials 
Program 

Columbia needlegrass. Sheri Hagwood, Bureau of Land 
Management.  

Alternate Names 
Common Alternate Names:  Subalpine needlegrass, 
western needlegrass 
 
Scientific Alternate Names:  Stipa columbiana, S. 
nelsonii, S. occidentalis  

Uses 
Columbia needlegrass is a valuable forage source for 
livestock and wildlife in spring and early summer. 
Animals avoid grazing needlegrass species as the seeds 
mature and develop a sharp, pointed callus.  Once the 

 

Establishment 
The full stand seeding rate for Columbia needlegrass is 5 
PLS lbs/ac.  Planting a full (pure) stand is not 
recommended, Columbia needlegrass should be planted 
as a component of a broader native seed mix. Adjust 
seeding rate to percent of mix desired.  Seed should be 
drilled to a depth of 1/4 to 1/2 inch. Broadcasting of the 
seed with no soil coverage or mulch is discouraged 
(Monsen et al. 2004).  
 
The seed has high levels of dormancy and should be 
planted in the fall to allow for natural stratification. High 
dormancy can be valuable to help the seed “wait” for 
optimum conditions for germination. Seedlings are slow 
to establish but can persist under the shade of other more 
quickly establishing species (Monsen et al. 2004). 
 
Management 
Grazing should be deferred for two or more seasons to 
allow plants to establish (Ogle et al. 2011). Columbia 
needlegrass has been shown to increase on rangelands 
where bluebunch wheatgrass (Pseudoroegneria spicata) 
and bluegrasses (Poa spp.) have been removed by 
overgrazing (Monsen et al. 2004), (USDA, 1937). 

Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no pests or potential problems documented for 
this species. 

Environmental Concerns 
Columbia needlegrass is native to western North America 
and poses no threats to native plant communities. 

Seeds and Plant Production 
Row spacing of 71 to 91 cm (28 to 36 in) is 
recommended. Row culture via cultivation should be 
maintained for optimum seed production. The seeding 
rate for 36 inch row spacing is 1.8 pounds PLS/ac. 
 
The twisted awn and sharp pointed callus of Columbia 
needlegrass can make harvesting, processing seed and 
planting difficult. Awns of Columbia needlegrass can be 
removed with a hammermill, debearder or brush machine 
without damage to the seed. Inert matter can be removed 
with screens and air. Seed purities and viabilities of above 
90% are attainable (Monsen et al. 2004; Barner 2009).  
 
There is a wide range in seed weights with wildland 
collections. Monsen et al. (2004) report seed lots ranging 
from 150,000 to 200,000 seeds/lb.  

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
The Upper Colorado Environmental Plant Center has two 
accessions of Columbia needlegrass under advanced 
evaluation (Alderson and Sharp 1994; Teresa Blanke, 
personal communication 2013).  
 
Common seed of Columbia needlegrass is available 
commercially. 

 

 
 
References 
Alderson, J. and W.C. Sharp. 1994. Grass Varieties in the 
United States. USDA Agriculture Handbook No. 170. 
296p. 

Barner, J. 2009. Propagation protocol for production of 
Achnatherum nelsonii (Scribn.) Barkworth seeds. 
USDA FS-R6 Bend Seed Extractory, Bend, OR. In: 
Native Plant Network. URL: 
http://www.nativeplantnetwork.org (accessed 17 July 
2013). Moscow, ID. University of Idaho, College of 
Natural Resources, Forest Research Nursery. 

Monsen, S.B., Stevens, R. and N. Shaw. 2004. Grasses. 

In: S.B. Monsen, R. Stevens, and N.L. Shaw 
[compilers]. Restoring western ranges and wildlands. 
Fort Collins, CO: USDA Forest Service, Rocky 
Mountain Research Station. General Technical 
Report RMRS-GTR-136-vol-2. p. 295-424. 
Ogle, D., St. John, l. Stannard, M., Cornwell, J, 

Holzworth, L. 2011. Technical Note 10: Pasture and 
Range Seedings – Planning, Installation, Evaluation, 
Management.  USDA-NRCS Boise, ID-Salt Lake 
City, UT-Spokane, WA. 35 p. 

United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service. 

1937. Range Plant Handbook. 532 p. 

Welsh, S.L., Atwood, N.D., Goodrich, S., and L.C. 

Higgins. 2003. A Utah Flora. Third Edition, revised. 
Brigham Young University, Provo, UT. 

Zouhar, K. 2000. Achnatherum nelsonii. In Fire Effects 
Information System [Online]. U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain 
Research Station, Fire Sciences Laboratory 
http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis (accessed July 22, 
2013). 

 
Prepared By:  
Derek Tilley, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, ID 
 
Loren St. John, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, ID 

Citation 
D. Tilley and L. St. John, L. 2013.  Plant guide for 
Columbia needlegrass (Achnatherum nelsonii) USDA-
Natural Resources Conservation Service, Plant Materials 
Center, Aberdeen, Idaho 83210. 

Published August 2013 
Edited:22Jul13 ls; 01Aug13 jab 

 

 

 

 

 

 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

