  

Natural Resources Conservation Service  

 

SHOWY 

MILKWEED 

Plant Guide 

Asclepais speciosa Torr. 
Plant Symbol = ASSP  
 
 

 
 

 

 

Description 
General:  Milkweed Family 
(Asclepiadaceae).  Showy milkweed is a 
native herbaceous perennial from 
widespread rhizomes, which produce stems 
that grow to 1½ to 5 ft tall in summer.  The 
gray-green leaves are opposite, 4 to 7 inches 
long, oval, and covered in velvety hairs.  
Stems and foliage exude milky latex sap 
when cut.  Flowers are in loose clusters at the top of the stems and are rose-purple, aging to yellow.  Individual Asclepias 
flowers look like crowns, with the corolla (petals) reflexed, and hoods above the corolla.  Plants flower from May to 
September.  Thick seed pods 3 to 5 inches long split down one side in fall to release reddish-brown, flat seeds.  Each seed has 
a tuft of white, silky hairs that allows them to be dispersed by wind. Leaves of first year plants are much narrower, about 0.5 
inches wide, causing the plant to often be mistaken for other narrow-leaved species of milkweed.  
 
Distribution:   

For current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site.  The plant occurs in 
California to British Colombia and Central Canada south to Texas. 
  
Habitat:  Showy milkweed is adapted to a broad range of moisture 
conditions. It is very commonly found along canal banks and 
riparian sites and in sub-irrigated or occasionally flooded wetlands 
with sedges and rushes. Populations can also be found however in 
very dry sites receiving less than 9 inches annual precipitation, 
though these populations are likely to be located in depressions 
where water accumulates. 
 
Adaptation 
This species typically grows in sites receiving 16 to 30 inches 
annual precipitation, but can be found in drier sites. It is adapted to 
a range of soil types, but prefers well-drained soils with a pH range 
of 5.0 to 7.0 (USDA NRCS 2016). 

 
Uses 
Insectary: Milkweed species are attractive to butterflies, bees, and other insects.  Accordingly, this is a good horticultural 
plant for floral landscaping to attract butterflies (particularly Monarchs) and other insects. Monarch butterflies are specific to 
milkweed plants.  This is the only type of plant on which the eggs are laid and the larvae will feed and mature into a 
chrysalis. It is important to have large clumps of milkweeds for the young caterpillars; their response to predation is to drop 
to the ground and "play possum."  They cannot find their way back to the milkweed stems, which they need to survive, unless 
they are fairly densely spaced.   
 
Monarch, Queen and Viceroy butterflies are Müllerian mimics; all are toxic, and have co-evolved similar warning patterns to 
avoid predation.  Other insects, which utilize milkweed, include the large milkweed bug, common milkweed bug, red 
milkweed beetle, blue milkweed beetle, and bees. 

 

 
Milkweed sap contains a lethal brew of cardenolides (heart poison), which produces vomiting in low doses and death in 
higher doses.  Chemicals from the milkweed plant make the monarch caterpillar's flesh distasteful to most animals.   
 
Ethnobotany 
People have used milkweed for fiber, food, and medicine all over the United States and southern Canada.  Fibers from the 
stems of milkweed have been identified in prehistoric textiles in the Pueblo region.  Tewa-speaking people of the Rio Grande 
still make string and rope from these fibers.  At Zuni, the silky seed fibers are spun on a hand-held wooden spindle and made 
into yarn and woven into fabric, especially for dancers.  Pueblo people ate green milkweed pods and uncooked roots from 
one of the species that forms fleshy tubers underground. 
 
Milkweeds (especially Asclepias speciosa) supply tough fibers for making cords and ropes, and for weaving a coarse cloth.  
Milkweed stems were collected after the stalks dried in late fall early winter.  The dried stalks were split open to release the 
fibers; milkweed fibers were sometimes mixed with fibers of Indian-hemp (Apocynum cannabinum).  The bark is removed 
and the fibers released by first rubbing between the hands and then drawing the fibers over a hard surface.  Twisting the fiber 
opposite each other and twining them together formed the cord; often this was accomplished by rolling the fibers on the thigh 
while twisting them together. 
 
Vast quantities of fiber plants are required for the making of nets, regalia, and cordage by California Indians.  Blackburn and 
Anderson (1993) quote Craig Bates of the Yosemite Museum that it takes approximately five stalks of milkweed or Indian 
hemp to manufacture one foot of cordage.  A Sierra Miwok feather skirt or cape contain about 100 feet of cordage made from 
approximately 500 plant stalks, while a deer net 40 feet in length contained some 7,000 feet of cordage, which would have 
required the harvesting of a staggering 35,000 plant stalks, (Barrett and Gifford 1933). 
 
Milkweed has also been used as a food source by Native Americans. The young shoots, stems, flower buds, immature fruits, 
and roots of showy milkweed were boiled and eaten as a vegetable by various indigenous groups of eastern and mid-western 
America. In some areas the young leaves and stems were used as greens.  The flowers were also eaten raw or boiled, and the 
buds were boiled for soup or with meat.  The most common use for these plants, recorded among almost all the tribes 
throughout California, was to obtain a kind of chewing gum from the sap of showy milkweed.  The sticky white sap was 
heated slightly until it became solid, then added to salmon fat or deer grease. 
 
The sap of showy milkweed was used as a cleansing and healing agent by some of the desert tribes for sores, cuts, and as a 
cure for warts and ringworm.  The silky hairs were burned off the ripe seeds, which were then ground and made into a salve 
for sores.  Seeds were boiled in a small amount of water and the liquid used to soak rattlesnake bites to draw out the poison.  
A hot tea made from the roots was given to bring out the rash in measles or as a cure for coughs.  It was also employed as a 
wash to cure rheumatism.  The mashed root, moistened with water, was used as a poultice to reduce swellings. 
 
Status 
Threatened or Endangered:  This plant is listed as threatened in Iowa (USDA NRCS 2016). 
 
Wetland Indicator: FAC 
 
Weedy or Invasive: Showy milkweed may become weedy or invasive in some regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed (Whitson 1996).  The light wind-dispersed seed allows it to invade agricultural fields. It 
also increases and spreads under grazing as most animals will avoid it while targeting preferred forage. Please consult with 
your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service office, state natural resource, or state agriculture department 
regarding its status and use. 
 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site (http://plants.usda.gov/) and your state’s Department of Natural Resources for this 
plant’s current status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Planting Guidelines 
Showy milkweed can also be direct seeded in late fall to allow for natural stratification during winter. The full stand seeding 
rate to apply 25 to 30 seeds/ft is 8 lbs/ac. The seeding rate should be adjusted to reflect the desired percentage in a seed 
mixture. Seed should be planted shallow, no more than 0.25 inches. 
 
Management 
Milkweed thrives in disturbed sites where competition from other species is reduced. Grazing or burning in the fall or spring 
can open niches, reduce competition and increase sunlight for milkweed plants to establish and spread. Both milkweed and 

 

 

dogbane were burned in the fall by California Indian tribes to eliminate dead stalks and stimulate new growth.  Burning 
causes new growth to have taller, straighter stems with longer fibers.  It also stimulates flower and seed production. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Insects besides butterflies that tolerate milkweed toxins include the large milkweed bug (Oncopeltus fasciatus), common 
milkweed bug (Lygaeus kalmii), red milkweed beetle (Tetraopes tetrophthalmus), blue milkweed beetle (Chrysochus 
cobaltinus), and some aphids (Aphis spp.).  These insects can occasionally cause feeding damage. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
Showy milkweed is native to North America and is a natural component of many ecosystems; however, it can become 
problematic in agricultural settings.  
 
Several species of milkweed are highly toxic and have caused poisonings in a wide range of livestock including chickens, 
rabbits, horses, cattle, sheep and goats (Panter et al., 2014). However, showy milkweed is considered to pose considerably 
less of poisoning than other species (Burrows and Tyrl 2001). Showy milkweed is much less likely to be accidentally grazed 
in high quantities because it is distinctly different in appearance from neighboring grasses, while other milkweeds with fine, 
narrow leaves are prone to accidental ingestion in large quantities.  
 
Although showy milkweed is bitter and typically avoided by cattle, cows will graze it when other forage is unavailable. Cows 
were observed grazing showy milkweed leaves and shoots to the ground in southeast Idaho after forage grasses had become 
coarse.   
 
Control 
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your area and 
how to use it safely.  Always read label and safety instructions for each control method.  Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific information.  USDA NRCS does not guarantee or warranty the products and 
control methods named, and other products may be equally effective. 
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Pods ripen indeterminately on the plant. Some after-ripening can be expected, but it is best to collect seed when pods are 
ready to split and seed is brown. Aberdeen PMC places pods on bed frames lined with ¼ inch hardware cloth. As the pods 
mature and are stirred the seed falls through mesh while the pod halves and the coma hair remains above. The hair can be 
easily vacuumed off with a shop vac. Corvallis PMC shovels dried pods into a combine and allows the combine to separate 
seed from the fluff. 
 
Counts done at the Aberdeen, Idaho Plant Materials Center indicate there are approximately 240 seeds in each pod and 
70,000-80,000 seeds/lb, so approximately 300 pods are needed to collect one pound of cleaned seed. 
 
Showy milkweed seed is often dormant and requires a cold stratification treatment for germination; however seed collections 
in southeast Idaho and central California germinated at IDPMC did not require any stratification for full germination. Landis 
and Dumroese (2015) recommend cleaning the seed in a running water rinse prior to stratification.  
 
Aberdeen PMC grows showy milkweed in 10 ci conetainers, by sowing approximately 5 seeds/cone covered lightly with 
gravel. Stratification has not been necessary for adequate germination. Soil is kept moist via overhead misting during the 
germination period. As plants develop the watering duration is increased to encourage root growth. Some thinning may be 
required but the PMC typically lets the plants stay thick because the taproot doesn’t fill the cone well. Transplant success has 
been good as long as the soil is kept moist. Another option is to use Jiffy Peat Pots or other media that retains its shape and 
structure during planting (Landis and Dumroese 2015). 
 
Propagation by rhizome cuttings is easy and reliable.  The cuttings should be dug when the plant is dormant (generally from 
October through February or April depending on temperatures).  Each piece of rhizome should have at least one bud.  Plant 
the rhizomes 4 to 6 inches deep.  Irrigation the first year will improve survival.  Both seedlings and cuttings will usually 
bloom in the second year, although cuttings will occasionally bloom their first year (Young-Mathews and Eldredge 2012). 
 

 

Whole Plant Collections: For milkweed species 
with rhizomes, propagation by cuttings of the 
tuberous rhizome is also easy and reliable.  The 
cuttings should be made when the plant is 
dormant.  Each piece of the rhizome should 
have at least one bud (they are about two inches 
apart).  Timing of propagation is important.  
Harvest or divide plants and move them in 
October at the beginning of the rainy season.  
Place the plants in the ground by late fall so they 
can develop enough root growth to survive the 
winter.  Irrigation the first year will improve 
survival, and by the second year the root system 
should be well enough established so plants will 
survive on their own.  Both seedlings and 
cuttings will usually bloom in their second year, 
although cuttings will occasionally bloom 
during their first year (Kindscher 1992). 

 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area of origin)  
There are currently no released selections or cultivars of showy milkweed; however, seed from wildland collected material is 
readily available commercially. Plant materials should be selected based on the local climate, resistance to local pests, and 
intended use. Consult with your local land grant university, local extension or local USDA NRCS office for 
recommendations for use in your area. 
 
Literature Cited 
Balls, E.K. 1962.  Early uses of California plants.  University of California Press.  102 pp. 
Blackburn, T.C. & K. Anderson 1993.  Before the wilderness.  Environmental management by native Californians.  A 

Bouton, D.W. 1995.  The Monarch butterfly.  A fragile tissue in the wind.  Continuum Publishers, Harpersville, New York, 

Ballena Press Publication.  476 pp. 

New York. 

Bunting, P. Pers comm 2-8-1999.  Forester and member of the Sierra Native American Tribal Council. 
Burrows, G.E. and R.J. Tyrl. 2001. Toxic Plants of North America. Iowa State Press.  Ames IA. 1342p. 
Cooke, S.S. 1997.  A field guide to the common wetland plants of Western Washington and Northwestern Oregon.  Seattle 

Audubon Society and Washington Native Plant Society.  414 pp. 

Dunmire, W.W. & G.D. Tierney 1995.  Wild plants of the Pueblo Province.  Exploring Ancient and Enduring Uses.  Museum 

of Mexico Press, Santa Fe, New Mexico.  289 pp. 

Dunmire, W.W. & G.D. Tierney 1997.  Wild plants and native peoples of the Four Corners.  Museum of New Mexico Press.  

312 pp. 

Gilmore, M.R. 1977.  Uses of plants by the Indians of the Missouri River region. University of Nebraska Press.  125 pp. 
Grace, E.S. 1997.  The world of the Monarch butterfly. Sierra Club Books.  San Francisco, California.  114 pp. 
Gunther, E. 1945 rev. 1973. Ethnobotany of western Washington.  University of Washington Publications in Anthropology, 

10(1).  University of Washington Press, Seattle, Washington. 

Hedrick, U.P. 1972.  Sturtevant's edible plants of the world.  Dover Publications, Inc.,  New York, New York.  686 pp. 
Hickman, J.C. 1993.  The Jepson manual. Higher plants of California.  University of California Press.  1399 pp. 
Kindscher, K. 1992.  Medicinal wild plants of the prairie.  An ethnobotanical guide. University Press of Kansas.  340 pp. 
Kuhnlein, H.V. & N.J. Turner 1991.  Traditional plant foods of Canadian indigenous peoples.  Nutrition, botany and use.  

Gordon and Breach Science Publishers.  633 pp. 

Landis T.D. and R.K. Dumroese. 2015. Propagating native milkweeds for restoring monarch butterfly habitat. The 

International Plant Propagators’ Society, Combined Proceedings, Vol. 64 (2014): 299-307. 

Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, & A.L. Nelson 1951.  American wildlife and plants: A guide to wildlife food habits.  Dover 

Publications, Inc., New York, New York.  500 pp. 

Mason, H.L. 1957.  A flora of the marshes of California.  University of California Press, Berkeley and Los Angeles.  878 pp. 
Moser, C.L. 1993.  Native American basketry of southern California.  Riverside Museum Press.  155 pp. 
Panter, K.E., Ralphs, M.H., Pfister, J.A., Gardner, D.R., Stegelmeier, B.L., Lee, S.T., Welch, K.D., Green, B.T., Davis, T.Z. 
and D. Cook. 2014. Plants Poisonous to Livestock in the Western States. USDA-ARS. Agriculture Information Bulletin 
Number 415.  

Powell, J.A. & C.L. Hogue 1979.  California insects.  University of California Press. 388 pp.  
Schmidt, M.G. 1980.  Growing California native plants.  University of California Press.  366 pp. 

 

Stewart, B. 1997.  Common butterflies of California.  West Coast Lady Press.  255 pp. 
USDA, NRCS 1999.  The PLANTS database.  National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana.  <http://plants.usda.gov>  

Version: 05APR1999. 

Whitson, T.D. (ed.) et al.. 1996. Weeds of the West. Western Society of Weed Science in cooperation with Cooperative 

Extension Services, University of Wyoming. Laramie, Wyoming. 

Young-Mathews, A., and E. Eldredge. 2012. Plant fact sheet for showy milkweed (Asclepias speciosa). USDA-Natural 

Resources Conservation Service, Corvallis Plant Materials Center, OR and Great Basin Plant Materials Center, Fallon, 
NV. 

 
Citation 
Stevens, M. 2000. Plant Guide for showy milkweed (Asclepias speciosa). USDA-Natural Resources Conservation Service, 
National Plant Data Center. 

Published 2000  
 
Edited: 05dec00jsp; 17mar03ahy; 30may06jsp; 20dec16djt 

For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation District at 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the  
Plant Materials Program Web site: 
http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability of other Web sites. 
 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination against its customers, employees, and applicants for 
employment on the bases of race, color, national origin, age, disability, sex, gender identity, religion, reprisal, and where applicable, 
political beliefs, marital status, familial or parental status, sexual orientation, or all or part of an individual's income is derived from 
any public assistance program, or protected genetic information in employment or in any program or activity conducted or 
funded by the Department. (Not all prohibited bases will apply to all programs and/or employment activities.)  
 
If you wish to file an employment complaint, you must contact your agency's EEO Counselor (PDF) within 45 days of the date 
of the alleged discriminatory act, event, or in the case of a personnel action. Additional information can be found online at 
http://www.ascr.usda.gov/complaint_filing_file.html.  
 
If you wish to file a Civil Rights program complaint of discrimination, complete the USDA Program Discrimination Complaint 
Form (PDF), found online at http://www.ascr.usda.gov/complaint_filing_cust.html, or at any USDA office, or call (866) 632-
9992 to request the form. You may also write a letter containing all of the information requested in the form. Send your 
completed complaint form or letter to us by mail at U.S. Department of Agriculture, Director, Office of Adjudication, 1400 
Independence Avenue, S.W., Washington, D.C. 20250-9410, by fax (202) 690-7442 or email at program.intake@usda.gov.  
Individuals who are deaf, hard of hearing or have speech disabilities and you wish to file either an EEO or program complaint 
please contact USDA through the Federal Relay Service at (800) 877-8339 or (800) 845-6136 (in Spanish).  
 
Persons with disabilities who wish to file a program complaint, please see information above on how to contact us by mail directly 
or by email. If you require alternative means of communication for program information (e.g., Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) 
please contact USDA's TARGET Center at (202) 720-2600 (voice and TDD).  
 
For any other information dealing with Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) issues, persons should either contact 
the USDA SNAP Hotline Number at (800) 221-5689, which is also in Spanish or call the State Information/Hotline Numbers.  
For any other information not pertaining to civil rights, please refer to the listing of the USDA Agencies and Offices for specific 
agency information. 
 

 

 

Helping People Help the Land 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

