 
 

 

Plant Guide

hairy on the underside. Two to 8 flowers are born in a 
loose raceme. The flowers are pinkish purple with  
 
white tips on the wing petals. The fruit is an oval 
shaped, inflated pod, 11 to 18 mm (0.4 to 0.7 in) long 
and 8 to 12 mm (0.to 0.5 in) wide, mottled with 
pinkish brown freckles (Welsh et al., 2003). 

Distribution:   
Heliotrope milkvetch is known from three 
populations in Sanpete and Sevier Counties, Utah. 
All populations are located within the boundaries of 
the Manti-Lasal National Forest. Two populations 
occur on Heliotrope Mountain and the third is located 
on White Mountain. In total, the three populations 
cover an estimated 390 acres and comprise 
approximately 200,000 individuals (USDI-FWS, 
1995).  
 
For current distribution, consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Habitat:  
Heliotrope milkvetch grows in the subalpine zone 
from 3,200 to 3,350 m. (10,500 to 11,000 ft) in shale 
barrens of the Flagstaff Limestone formation. It can 
be found at timberline on plateaus and openings in 
spruce-fir forests growing with other alpine, mat-
forming species. 

Adaptation 
This species is adapted to windswept plateaus at 
timberline in the Flagstaff Limestone formation. 
Average precipitation on the plateaus ranges from 76 
to 90 cm (30 to 35 in). 

Management 
The primary threat to heliotrope milkvetch comes 
from oil and gas exploration and development. The 
species occurs in an area with potential for oil and 
gas development. Any habitat disturbance from oil 
and gas exploration could have a significant negative 
impact on the survival of the species.  
 
Limited sheep grazing occurs in heliotrope milkvetch 
habitat; however negative impacts to the populations 
from the current grazing levels have not been 
observed (USDI-FWS, 1995). 

Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no known pests or potential problems 
regarding heliotrope milkvetch. 

 

 

HELIOTROPE 
MILKVETCH 
Astragalus limnocharis 
Barneby var. montii (S.L. 

Welsh) Isely  
Plant Symbol = ASLIM 

Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Idaho and Utah Plant 
Materials Program 

Heliotrope milkvetch (Astragalus limnocharis var. montii). 
Photo by Duane Atwood 

Uses 
There are no known human uses of heliotrope 
milkvetch. Sheep are known to graze the leaves and 
stems. 

Status 
Heliotrope milkvetch was listed as a threatened 
species with critical habitat in 1987 (USDI-FWS, 
1987). It is considered a species with a low degree of 
threat and a low recovery potential. 
 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Description 
General:  Legume family (Fabaceae). Heliotrope 
milkvetch is a low growing perennial forb. The 
leaves are pinnately compound with 5 to 13 leaflets; 
each 2 to 8 mm (0.08 to 0.3 in) long and 1 to 2 mm 
(0.04 to 0.08 in) wide. The stems and leaves have 
basally fixed hairs; the leaves are glabrous above and 

 

Environmental Concerns 
There are no known environmental concerns 
regarding heliotrope milkvetch. 
 

Seeds and Plant Production 
Plants flower immediately after winter snow melt in 
mid-June. The species can self pollinate, but is 
primarily an outcrosser. The flowers are pollinated by 
multiple species of mason bees (Osmia spp.) (Greer 
et al., 1995). 

References 
Greer, S.M., Tepedino, V.J., Griswold, T.L. and 

W.R. Bowlin. 1995. Pollinator sharing by three 
sympatric milkvetches, including the endangered 
species Astragalus montii. Great Basin 
Naturalist. 55(1): 19-28. 

USDI-FWS. 1987. Endangered and threatened 
wildlife and plants; final rule to determine 
Astragalus montii (Heliotrope milkvetch) to be 
threatened species, with designation of critical 
habitat). In: Federal Register. 52(215): 42652-
42657. 

USDI-FWS. 1995. Heliotrope milkvetch (Astragalus 

montii) recovery plan. U.S. Fish and Wildlife 
Service. Denver, Colorado. 11pp. 

Welsh, S.L., N.D. Atwood, S. Goodrich, and L.C. 
Higgins. 2003. A Utah Flora. Third Edition, 
revised. Brigham Young University, Provo, UT. 

 
Prepared By: 
Derek Tilley; USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho. 
 
Loren St. John, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho. 
 
Dan Ogle, USDA NRCS, Boise, Idaho. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Citation 
Tilley, D., L. St. John and D. Ogle. 2010. Plant guide 
for heliotrope milkvetch (Astragalus limnocharis var. 
montii). USDA-Natural Resources Conservation 
Service, Idaho Plant Materials Center. Aberdeen, ID. 

Published Jan 2010 
Edited: 03Jan2011 djt, 03Jan2011dgo, 03Jan2011lsj 

For more information about this and other plants, 
please contact your local NRCS field office or 
Conservation District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ 
and visit the PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant Materials Program 
Web site http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or 
availability of other Web sites. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

