WOOLLY MILKWEED 
Asclepias vestita Hook. & Arn. 

Plant Symbol = ASVE2 

Contributed by:  USDA NRCS California Plant Materials 
Center 

 

Figure 1: Wooly milkweed flower and leaves. Photo ©Neal Kramer, 2010 
@ CalPhotos 

 
Warning: Milkweed may be toxic when taken internally, 
without sufficient preparation. 

Alternate Names 
Two subspecies have been recognized:  
Asclepias vestita  ssp. vestita  
Asclepias vestita ssp. parishii (Jeps.) Woodson. 

Uses 
Ethnobotanic: Milkweed is used as a food and fiber 
source.  Wappo and Sierra Miwok tribes consumed the 
leaves and roots of milkweed gathered in the spring by 
repeatedly boiling the plant in water and changing the 
water until it ran clear.  Chumash women used sap from 
the stems to produce a chewing gum (Anderson, 2005).  
Milkweed is an important fiber source for cordage.  
Tribes including the Chumash, Miwok, Washoe, and 
Northern Paiute collected milkweed stalks once the plant 
died back in the fall or winter.  Milkweed fiber strands are 
twisted together to form the cordage rope (Anderson 
2005,Timbrook, 2007).  This twined fiber is used to 
produce nets, netting bags, feather capes, deer nets, bow 
strings, and other items. 
 
The seed floss from milkweed seedpods was used in life 
jackets for the U.S. Navy during World War II and as a 

 

 

 

Plant Guide

substitute for down in pillows and comforters (Knudsen 
and Sayler, 1992). 
 
Wildlife: The plant is closely associated with Monarch 
butterflies (Danaus plexippus) as the larvae have an 
obligate feeding relationship with milkweed (Borders and 
Mader, 2011). Monarch butterflies only lay their eggs on 
the underside of milkweed leaves and no other plant 
species.  Caterpillar larvae mature and emerge from eggs 
after three to five days. The caterpillars feed on milkweed 
leaves, which provide them with a chemical defense.  The 
larvae ingest and sequester toxins from milkweeds 
including cardenolides and alkaloids exuded from stems 
and leaves.  These toxins protect Monarch butterflies 
from predation as the caterpillar becomes toxic to 
potential predators.   
Milkweed bugs, beetles, and aphids also use the plant and 
feed on leaves, flowers, and seeds. 
 
Pollinators: Many species of bees and wasps, flies, 
butterflies and moths, and are attracted to the floral 
resources in milkweed flowers (Mader et al,. 2011).  The 
plant is promoted in gardens to attract pollinators.   

Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Description 
General:  Woolly milkweed is a herbaceous perennial in 
the Asclepiadaceae (Milkweed) family (Rosetti and 
Hoffman, 2012). Stems are clustered from the root stalk 
and ascending or decumbent up to 2 feet long.  Leaves are 
persistent, opposite, elliptic or ovate, 2 to 6 inches long, 
and have short petioles.  The leaves are a grayish-green 
color and hairy. Woolly milkweed is named for its dense 
hair cover on stems and leaves, although the plant can 
become glabrous and less hairy with age (Borders, 2012).   
The inflorescence is terminal and sessile with no 
peduncle.  The flowers are radial with 5 petals and 5 
sepals that are reflexed, and either yellow, cream, or 
purple in color.  The filaments are fused together in a 
column with appendages called hoods.  The hood serves 
as a reservoir of nectar, which flows from nectaries 
located in the stigmatic chambers (Wyatt and Broyles, 
1994).  The hoods are yellow-white with a vertical brown 
stripe and are generally elevated above the corolla base.  
An elongate projection called a horn attaches to the hood 
and curves back toward the filament column. Pollen is 
contained within sacs called pollinia.  Milkweed plants 
are largely self-incompatible and must be cross-pollinated 
to produce seed. Pollination occurs when pollinia hook 

onto the leg of a pollinator such as a bee, when the 
pollinator visits another flower, the pollinia is inserted 
into the stigmatic chamber where pollination occurs via 
the stigmatic slit.  Woolly milkweed flowers from 
approximately April to July.  The fruits are 3 inch long 
yellowish-green pods called follicles that contain seeds 
approximately three-eighths of an inch in length that 
darken when mature. Woolly milkweed has the largest 
seeds of any milkweed species in California. 
  
Plants in the Asclepiadaceae (Milkweed) family produce 
a milky sap that is exuded from damaged stems or leaves.  
The sticky sap serves as an inducible mechanical and 
chemical defense against herbivory.  The sap contains 
chemicals including alkaloids and cardenolides that can 
be toxic when consumed by most potential herbivores.  

Distribution:  Woolly milkweed is endemic to California 
and distributed across sunny, arid environments. The 
plant is adapted to dry summers and moist winter 
conditions. Its range extends from the Central Valley, 
eastward into the Mojave Desert and southward along the 
Transverse Ranges family (Rosetti and Hoffman, 2012).  
For current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 

Habitat:  Woolly Milkweed is found in valley grassland, 
chaparral, and foothill woodland habitats frequently found 
in association with Valley Oak, Quercus lobata. 

Adaptation 
Woolly milkweed is adapted to sunny areas along dry 
plains, brushy flats, hillsides, and desert canyons at 
elevations from 164 to 4430 feet in areas with 7 to 31 
inches of annual precipitation (Calflora, 2012).  Milkweed 
plants tend to do well in disturbed or open areas. 

Management 
Milkweed plants do not require much maintenance once 
established.  The stalks naturally die back in winter.  
California Indians managed milkweed for use and would 
either harvest or burn the stalks to stimulate new growth 
in the plant (Anderson, 2005).  Stems grow in taller and 
straighter after burning, which also stimulates flower and 
seed production. 

Pests and Potential Problems 
Potential pests of milkweed plants include seed bugs, 
milkweed longhorn beetles, and aphids. 

Environmental Concerns 
Milkweed contains cardenolides that can be toxic to 
humans and livestock alike. Of seven California 
milkweed species tested, woolly milkweed was found to 
have one of the highest mean plant cardenolide 
concentrations, with an average of 750 µg/0.1g dry 
weight (Malcolm and Brower, 1989).  Animals tend to 
avoid eating the plant but may consume milkweeds when 
concentrated in overgrazed areas.  See USDA 

 

Agricultural Research Service 2006 for more details.  
Toxic dosages can range from 0.2 to 2% body weight 
depending on the species of milkweed and the type of 
livestock.  Forero et al., (2011) have summarized 
common signs of poisoning.  Potential symptoms of 
milkweed poisoning for cattle and sheep include 
depression, diarrhea, colic, and irregular respiration.  
Potential symptoms of milkweed poisoning for horses 
include depression, trembling, and seizures.  Potential 
symptoms for goats include depression, weakness, 
staggering, labored respiration, elevated temperatures, 
dilation of pupils, and seizures. 

Seeds and Plant Production 
Seeds are contained within pods called follicles.  Ripe 
follicles are darker in color and should be collected before 
they have split open.  Seeds darken and harden when 
mature.  Each seed of this wind-dispersed plant has fluffy 
hairs attached that are often called “floss.”  Follicles 
should therefore be collected carefully to avoid losing 
seeds.  Seeds can either be planted in the ground in fall or 
planted in pots for the winter, although milkweeds tend to 
do better when planted directly in the ground. 
 
Whole Plant Collection: Milkweed species can be 
propagated from cuttings.  One option involves cuttings 
from the stems.  Cut stems treated with rooting hormone 
should be kept continually moist after planting in either 
vermiculite, sand, or potting soil. Cuttings can then be 
transplanted 2 to 3 months later.  Milkweed can also be 
propagated from rhizome cuttings once the plant has died 
back.  Each cut rhizome should have a bud.  Propagation 
generally should happen in the fall and plants should be 
put in the ground early enough to allow for sufficient root 
growth before winter.  Survival rates improve when 
cuttings and young plants are watered during the first year 
of growth. 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
Woodson (1954) recognized two subspecies. Asclepias 
vestita ssp. vestita  with a cream corolla and distributed in 
dry plains and low hills of the Central Valley and central 
western California. Asclepias  vestita ssp. parishii  
subspecies with a purple corolla and  distributed in brushy 
flatlands,  hillsides, and desert canyons of central western 
California, the Transverse Ranges, and the Mojave 
Desert. Woodson noted that the two populations were not 
quite as well defined as other subspecies with 
considerable intergradation that may be environmental 
rather than genetic. Based upon this the infraspecific taxa 
are not currently recognized (Rosetti and Hoffman, 2012). 
 
Plants are available from some nurseries. It is best to plant 
species from your local area, adapted to the specific site 
conditions where the plants are to be grown.  

 
 

 

References 
Anderson, M.K. 2005. Tending the wild: Native 

American knowledge and the management of 
California’s natural resources. University of 
California Press, Berkeley and Los Angeles. 

Borders, B. 2012. A guide to common milkweeds of 

California. The Xerces Society. 

Borders, B., and E. Mader. 2011. California pollinator 
plants: native milkweeds. Storey Publishing. North 
Adams, MA. The Xerces Society. 

Calflora. 2012. The Calflora database [Online]. Available 
at http://www.calflora.org/ (accessed: 27 Sep. 2012). 
Berkeley, CA. 

Forero, L., G. Nader, A. Craigmill, J. M. DiTomaso, B. 
Puschner, and J. Maas. 2011. Livestock-poisoning 
plants of California. University of California Division 
of Agriculture and Natural Resources Publication 
8398, Oakland, CA. 

Knudsen, H.D., and R.Y. Sayler. 1992. Milkweed: The 

worth of a weed. New Crops, New Uses, New 
Markets, 118-23. 1992 Yearbook of Agriculture, 
USDA. 

Malcolm, S.B., and L.P. Brower. 1989. Evolutionary and 
ecological implications of cardenolide sequestration 
in the monarch butterfly. Experientia 45:284-295. 

Mader, E., M. Shepherd, M. Vaughan, S.H. Black, and G. 

 

USDA Agricultural Research Service. 2006. Poisonous 

Plant Research: Milkweed (Asclepias spp.) [Online]. 
Available at 
http://www.ars.usda.gov/Services/docs.htm?docid=9
955 (accessed 03 Aug 2012). USDA-ARS, 
Washington, DC. 

Woodson, R.F. 1954. Ann. Missouri Bot. Gard. The 
North American species of Asclepias. 41: 1-211 

Wyatt, R., and S.B. Broyles. 1994. Ecology and evolution 

of reproduction in milkweeds. Annual Review of 
Ecology and Systematics 25:423-441. 

 
Prepared By: Patrick Nicholson 
USDA, NRCS Plant Materials Center, Lockeford 
California 

Citation 
Nicholson, P., 2012. Plant guide for woolly milkweed 
(Asclepias vestita). USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, California Plant Materials Center. 
Lockeford, CA 95237. 

Published: August, 2013 

Edited:  

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites 

LeBuhn. 2011. Attracting native pollinators: 
protecting North America’s bees and butterflies. 
Storey Publishing, North Adams, MA. The Xerces 
Society. 

Rosatti, T.J. and C.A. Hoffman  2012. Author of taxon 
treatment] 2013. Asclepias vestita, Revision 1, in 
Jepson Flora Project (eds.) Jepson eFlora, 
http://ucjeps.berkeley.edu/cgi-
bin/get_IJM.pl?tid=14441, accessed on Aug 30 2013  
Timbook, J. 2007. Chumash Ethnobotany: Santa Barbara 

Museum of Natural History Monograph No 5. 
Heyday Books, Berkely, CA. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

.

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

