 
 

 

Plant Guide

Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State Department 
of Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General: Poppy family (Papaveraceae).  Dwarf bear 
poppy is a mound forming perennial forb arising from an 
underground woody caudex and long taproot. The leaves 
are 0.5 to 8 cm (0.2 to 3 in) long and 4 to 16 mm (0.16 to 
0.63 in) wide with 3 or 4 lobes or teeth at the tip. Flowers 
sit atop a 2 to 9 cm (0.8 to 3.5 in) stalk. The petals (4 to 6) 
are white and 2 to 4 cm (0.8 to 1.5 in) long. The fruit is an 
egg-shaped capsule filled with shiny black, 2.5 to 3 mm 
(0.10 to 0.12 in) long seeds (Welsh et al. 2003). 
 
Distribution: 
Dwarf bear poppy is limited in distribution to the St. 
George area in extreme Southwestern Utah. There are 
approximately 12 populations within 10 miles of St. 
George with larger populations near Red Bluff, Webb 
Hill, White Dome, Punchbowl Dome and Atkinville. 
For current distribution, consult the Plant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Habitat:  
Dwarf bear poppy is found in mixed warm desert shrub 
communities from 750 to 1050 m (2,500 to 3,400 ft) 
elevations (Nelson and Harper 1991). The dominant plant 
species associated with dwarf bear poppy habitat are 
Fremont indigo bush (Psorothamnus fremontii), 
cheesebush (Hymenoclea salsola), Mormon tea (Ephedra 
torreyana), shadscale (Atriplex confertifolia), shrubby 
buckwheat (Eriogonum corymbosum) and Fremont 
pepperweed (Lepidium fremontii).  
 
Adaptation 
The area in which dwarf bear poppy is found is known as 
the Dixie Corridor, where the Mohave Desert floristic 
province meets the Colorado Plateau. The non-alkaline, 
gypsiferous soils form cryptogamic soil crusts, which 
exclude most plant species. The result is a region of 
“badlands” with low rolling hills and sparse vegetation 
(USDI FWS 1985).  Dwarf bear poppy is restricted in 
range to areas with gypsum surbstrates derived from the 
Shnabkaib Member of the Moenkopi Formation (Nelson 
and Harper 1991). 
 

 

DWARF BEAR POPPY 
Arctomecon humilis Coville 

Plant Symbol = ARHU3 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Idaho Plant Materials 
Program 
 

 

Figure 1. Dwarf bearpoppy. Jane Villa-Lobos @ USDA-NRCS PLANTS 
Database. 

 
Alternate Names 
Coville bear-claw poppy 
Common bear poppy 
Low bear-claw poppy 
 
Uses 
There are no known human or wildlife associated uses of 
dwarf  bear poppy. 
 
Status 
Dwarf bear poppy was listed by the USDI Fish and 
Wildife Service as an endangered species in 1979 (USDI 
FWS 1979). At the time of the listing in 1979 this species 
was known to exist in only 5 small disjunct populations 
on very specialized and localized soils. Several factors 
place dwarf bear poppy in danger of extinction throughout 
its range. The greatest threat to dwarf bear poppy comes 
from housing and industrial development. The area 
currently occupied by the city of Bloomington, Utah 
covers approximately one third of dwarf bear poppy’s 
historically known habitat. Strip mining of gypsum 
deposits in dwarf bear poppy communities also poses a 
threat to the species. Additional threats come from private 
collectors taking plants for ornamental and home 
cultivation. However, the unique soil requirements of the 
species preclude it from surviving outside of its native 
range. 

 

 Establishment 
Due to the restricted range and specific habitat 
requirements of dwarf bear poppy, it has proven difficult 
to transplant and establish (USDI-FWS 1985).  
 
No known propagation protocols are available. 
 
Management 
Management for dwarf bear poppy is focused on habitat 
preservation. The expansion and development of St. 
George and surrounding communities poses the greatest 
threat to the species. Existing populations should be 
protected against further development and other land use 
that disturbs the sensitive soil surface.  
 
Direct effects of off road vehicle  use to individual plants 
may be limited to severe; however destruction of the 
cryptogamic crusts and the resulting soil erosion 
significantly impacts the limited suitable habitat available 
for dwarf bear poppy (Nelson and Harper 1991). 
Moreover, soil erosion also has an adverse affect on the 
seed bank from which dwarf bear poppy can reestablish 
populations. 

Collection for landscape use has been noted as a threat to 
dwarf bear poppy (USDI-FWS 1979), but little evidence 
of collecting has been seen at the known populations 
(USDI-FWS 1985). 

 

 

Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no known pests or potential problems 
associated with dwarf bear poppy. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
There are no known environmental concerns associated 
with dwarf bear poppy. 
 
References 
Nelson, D.R., Harper, K.T. 1991. Site characteristics and 

habitat requirements of the endangered dwarf bear-
claw poppy (Arctomecon humilis Coville, 
Papaveraceae). Great Basin Naturalist 51(2): 167-
175. 

USDA, NRCS. 2010. The PLANTS Database 

(http://plants.usda.gov, 13 April 2010). National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, LA 70874-4490 
USA. 

USDI Fish and Wildlife Service. 1979. Endangered and 

threatened wildlife and plants: rule to determine 
Arctomecon humilis is an endangered species. 
Federal Register. 44 (216): 64250-64252. 

USDI Fish and Wildlife Service. 1985. Dwarf bear-poppy 

(Arctomecon humilis Coville) recovery plan. U.S. 
Fish and Wildlife Service, Denver, CO. 36 pp. 

 

Welsh, S.L., N.D. Atwood, S. Goodrich, and L.C. 

Higgins. 2003. A Utah Flora. Third Edition, revised. 
Brigham Young University, Provo, UT. 

 
Prepared By 
Derek Tilley; USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho. 
 
Loren St. John, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho. 
 
Dan Ogle, USDA NRCS State Office, Boise, Idaho. 
 
Citation 
Tilley, D., St. John, L. and D. Ogle. 2010. Plant guide for 
Dwarf bearpoppy (Arctomecon humilis). USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Idaho Plant Materials 
Center. Aberdeen, ID. 
 
Published January 2011 
Edited: 14Apr2010djt; 15Apr10dgo;25Aug10lsj  

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

