 
 

 

Plant Guide

Schulz, Brassica quadrivalvis Hook. f. & Thomson, 
Caulanthus sulfureus Payson 

Uses 
Cover crop: Field mustard is used as a winter annual or 
rotational cover crop in vegetable and specialty crops as 
well as row crop production.  It has the potential to 
prevent erosion, suppress weeds and soil-borne pests, 
alleviate soil compaction and scavenge nutrients (Clark, 
2007).  It has rapid fall growth, high biomass production, 
and nutrient scavenging ability following high input cash 
crops.  Field mustard can be grown as a cover crop alone 
or in a mix with other brassicas, small grains, or legumes. 
In the Northeast, Mid-Atlantic, and Great Lakes 
bioregions, it appears to be a good tool as a biofumigant 
cover crop for control of nematodes, soil-borne diseases 
including the fungal pathogen (Rhizoctonia) responsible 
for damping-off, weeds, and other pests. When biomass is 
incorporated into the soil, soil microbes break down 
sulfur compounds in the plant into isothiocyanide, which 
can act as a fumigant and weed suppressant (Olmstead, 
2006).  Field mustard produces 2,000 to 5,000 pounds of 
dry matter per acre per year and 40 to 160 lb/acre total N 
(Clark, 2007).     
Intercropping: Intercropping can increase cropping 
system diversity and profitability by producing two 
simultaneous crops on the same land.  In New Mexico, 
forage turnip was interseeded between rows of chili 
peppers and sweet corn without affecting yields of the 
cash crop when the turnip seeding was timed correctly 
(Gulden et al., 1997a, 1997b).   
Forage: Cultivars with larger roots, commonly called 
forage turnip, have been a popular forage crop for 
livestock in Europe and Asia for at least 600 years 
(Undersander et al., 1991). Forage turnip is a useful crop 
for extending the fall grazing season for dairy cows and 
other livestock (Thomet and Kohler, 2003; UMass 
Extension, 2012).  Forage turnip was largely replaced 
with corn silage in the early 1900s because it required less 
labor. The use of forage turnip increased again in the 
1970s with the development of new cultivars that could 
be seeded directly into pastures.   
Aboveground vegetation contains 20 to 25% crude 
protein, 65 to 80% in vitro digestible dry matter 
(IVDDM), about 20% neutral detergent fiber (NDF), and 
about 23% acid detergent fiber (ADF).  The roots contain 
10 to 14% crude protein, and 80 to 85% IVDDM 
(Undersander et al., 1991).  However, the roots, leaves, 
and especially seeds of Brassica and related species 
contain sulfur compounds (glucosinolates) that can irritate 
the digestive tracts or create thyroid problems in livestock 
if consumed in large quantities over time (DiTomaso and 

FIELD MUSTARD 
Brassica rapa L. var. rapa  

Plant Symbol = BRRAR 

Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, Oregon  

 

Photo by George W. Williams, 2011, courtesy of Wildflowers in Santa 
Barbara at http://sbwildflowers.wordpress.com. 

Alternate Names 
Alternate Common Names: common mustard, wild 
mustard, wild turnip, forage turnip, wild rutabaga, 
birdsrape mustard, bird’s rape, rape mustard 
Horticultural cultivar common names: turnip, summer 
turnip, seven-top turnip, rapini, broccoli raab, Italian kale; 
swede or white turnip (Ireland, Scotland, northern 
England) 
Alternate Scientific Names: Brassica rapa L. ssp. rapa,   
Brassica rapa L. var. campestris (L.) W.D.J. Koch,     
Brassica campestris L. ssp. rapifera (Metzger) Sinsk.,     
Brassica campestris L. var. rapa (L.) Hartm., Brassica 
napus var. quadrivalvis (Hook. f. & Thomson) O. E. 

 

Healy, 2007).  Toxicity in livestock can create symptoms 
such as colic, diarrhea, excessive salivation, and thyroid 
enlargement.  Problems arise when livestock eat large 
quantities of seed or are confined to pastures composed 
primarily of mustards.     
Vegetable crop: Brassica rapa has been cultivated in 
Europe as a vegetable for human consumption for more 
than 4,000 years (Duke, 1983). Turnip roots are the 
product of horticultural cultivars of this species.  The 
leaves, known as “turnip greens” or “turnip tops”, are also 
eaten raw or cooked and have a slightly spicy flavor 
similar to mustard greens.  Rapini, or broccoli raab, is 
another vegetable derived from a cultivar of this species. 
Seed: Canola is a cultivar of either Brassica rapa or B. 
napus. Seed was developed with lower levels of erucic 
acid and glucosinolates to make the oil safer for human 
consumption (Canola Council of Canada, 2012).  The 
name canola comes from Canadian oil, low acid; 
rapeseed oil must contain less than 2% erucic acid to 
qualify as canola. Canola and rapeseed oils are used as 
cooking oil, industrial lubricants, lamp oil, in soap 
making, biodiesel production, and the meal is used as a 
protein source in animal feed (Canola Council of Canada, 
2012; Plants for a Future, 2012).   
Ethnobotany: Field mustard roots and leaves were used as 
food by many Native American tribes following 
introduction of the plant by white settlers (Moerman, 
2012).  Various parts of the plant have been used as a folk 
remedy for different types of cancer, either by boiling the 
mashed stems and leaves, powdering the seeds, or making 
a salve from the flowers (Duke, 1983; Plants for a Future, 
2012). 

Status 
Brassica spp. is a state-listed restricted noxious weed seed 
in Arizona and a prohibited noxious weed seed in 
Michigan (MDA, 2011; Parker, 1972).  Please consult the 
PLANTS Web site and your state Department of Natural 
Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., threatened 
or endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland 
indicator values). 

Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive, primarily in 
cultivated fields and disturbed or waste areas, and may 
displace desirable vegetation if not properly managed.  
Brassica rapa is listed as an invasive weed in Weeds of 
the West and Weeds of the United States and Canada 
(SWSS, 1998; Burrill et al., 2006). Please consult with 
your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension 
Service office, state natural resource, or state agriculture 
department regarding its status and use.  Weed 
information is also available from the PLANTS Web site 
at http://plants.usda.gov/.  Please consult the Related Web 
Sites on the Plant Profile for this species for further 
information. 

 

 

Description 
General:  Field mustard is an upright winter annual or 
biennial that is a member of the mustard family 
(Brassicaceae).  Plants exist as basal rosettes until 
flowering stems develop at maturity, usually in the second 
year.  Plants grow 1 to 3 (or 4) ft tall from a sometimes 
fleshy, enlarged taproot, with a many-branched stem. The 
foliage is generally hairless and sometimes covered with a 
whitish film.  Lower leaves can reach 12 inches long, 
have a large central lobe, and usually one to four pairs of 
smaller side lobes.  Upper leaves are smaller, non-lobed, 
and have a pointed tip and widened, clasping base.  The 
bright yellow flowers are clustered at stem tops and have 
four petals that are ¼ to ½ inch long.  Plants flower from 
January to September, depending on climate and latitude, 
and are insect pollinated and self-incompatible.  The fruit 
is an elongated, two-parted capsule that splits open at the 
base to release the seeds at maturity. Each half of the pod 
has a single prominent lengthwise vein that distinguishes 
it from those of other Brassica species that have 3 to 7 
veins.  The hairless seed pods are ¾ to 4 inches long, with 
a narrow beak at the tip, and are born on long ½ to 1 inch 
stems that point outward or upward.  Seeds are about 1/16 
inch wide, nearly round, and reddish-gray to black 
(DiTomaso and Healy, 2007; Jepson Flora Project, 2012; 
Pojar and MacKinnon, 1994; Taylor, 1990; Turner and 
Gustafson, 2006; Warwick, 2010; Whitson et al., 2006). 
Distribution:  This species is native to Eurasia, but has 
spread all over the world and is now naturalized 
throughout much of North America. It grows from sea 
level to 5,000 ft.  For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site. 
Habitat:  Field mustard grows in disturbed areas including 
roadsides, ditches, cultivated fields, orchards, and 
gardens. 

Adaptation 
Field mustard is an extremely adaptable plant that grows 
in sandy to heavy clay soils and tolerates a pH range from 
4.8 to 8.5 (Hannaway and Larson, 2004).  It grows best in 
well-drained, moist soil, but may also grow in droughty 
conditions, moderate heat, and soils with low fertility 
(Clark, 2007). Although it grows best in full sun, it will 
grow in moderate shade.  Field mustard is hardy through 
USDA plant hardiness zone 7. 

Establishment 
Drill seed in the spring, late summer, or fall at a rate of 
1.5 to 10 lb/acre and a depth of ½ to ¾ inch in rows 4 to 
12 inches apart; alternately, broadcast at 8 to 14 lb/acre 
followed by cultipacking (Clark, 2007; Hannaway and 
Larson, 2004; Knodel and Olson, 2002).  Field mustard 
has approximately 150,000 to 200,000 seeds per pound, 
so a seeding rate of one pound per acre will result in 
approximately 3 to 5 seeds per square foot.  The target 
spacing for a pure stand is 5 to 6 plants per square foot 
(Undersander et al., 1991).  Some ecotypes have seed that 

 

requires a cold, moist period to break dormancy and 
stimulate germination (DiTomaso and Healy, 2007).  
Winter cover crops should be established as early as 
possible or about 4 weeks before the average date of the 
first hard freeze (Clark, 2007). Soil temperatures for 
planting should be between 45-85°F.  In northern 
climates, spring-planted crops generally produce less 
aboveground biomass and root growth, and are less 
reliable due to cool soil temperatures.        

Management 
Fertilization: Soils should be tested prior to planting to 
determine fertilizer and lime requirements.  When planted 
as a fall catch crop following a cash crop that has been 
well fertilized, additional fertilizer may not be needed 
(Duke, 1983).  Lime should be added to correct pH to 5.5 
to 6.8.  Fertilizer applications, if required, should be 
banded at least 2 inches to the side and below the seed.   
Forage: Forage turnips reach their maximum yields 70 to 
100 days after planting.  Turnip tops can be grazed up to 
four times at four week intervals to a 5-inch stubble. 
Animals can be allowed to graze plants to ground level 
including the roots on the final grazing (Undersander et 
al., 1991).  Forage crops should not be allowed to go to 
seed and should be fed in combination with other forages 
to avoid problems with toxicity. 
Cover crop termination: Field mustard usually survives 
early frost, but temperatures below 25°F will likely kill 
stands.  However, some winter-type cultivars can 
withstand temperatures as low as 10°F (Clark, 2007).  
Winterkilled mustard decomposes quickly, leaving a 
seedbed that is easy to plant into the following spring.  If 
the crop does not winterkill, it can be terminated with 
herbicide, by flail mowing (good for no-till systems), or 
tillage (especially for biofumigation) before the plants 
have reached full flower.  They can also be killed with a 
roller-crimper when they are in flower.  Some Brassica 
rapa cultivars have been resistant to glyphosate 
treatments (Clark, 2007), so another termination method 
may be needed for complete kill.   

Volunteer field mustard cover crop in a California vineyard. Photo by 
Gerald and Buff Corsi © California Academy of Sciences. 

 

 

Pests and Potential Problems 
Field mustard is susceptible to a number of viruses, 
including Arabis mosaic nepovirus, broad bean wilt 
fabavirus, and cauliflower mosaic caulimovirus 
(Hannaway and Larson, 2004).  It is also susceptible to 
turnip mosaic virus, which is transmitted by many species 
of aphids. Pest problems are best avoided by planting 
resistant cultivars and/or using crop rotations to break 
disease cycles (Black, 2001).  Clubroot (caused by 
Plasmodiophora brassicae) and black rot (caused by the 
bacterium Xanthomonas campestris pv. campestris) are 
the most serious diseases of turnips, while turnip aphid 
(Lipaphis erysimi), root maggot (Delia spp.), and flea 
beetles (Phyllotreta cruciferae and P. striolata) are the 
most damaging insect pests (Duke, 1983).  In order to 
avoid disease problems, do not grow Brassicas on the 
same field for more than two consecutive years.  Use a six 
year rotation in areas with clubroot (Undersander et al., 
1991).  Flea beetles can also cause extensive damage in 
canola, and are best avoided by planting on wider row 
spacing (12 inches) from April to mid-May, with a no-till 
planter in fall, or by treating seed with a systemic 
insecticide (Knodel and Olson, 2002).  Wild mustards, 
including field mustard, can also harbor pests and 
diseases that attack closely related crops in the mustard 
family (DiTomaso and Healy, 2007).   

Environmental Concerns 
Most Brassica species produce some hard seed (SAREP, 
2012).  Field mustard seeds can survive for fifty years or 
more if they are deeply buried, but seeds closer to the soil 
surface are not as persistent (DiTomaso and Healy, 2007).  
Mustards also may become a fire hazard when they dry at 
the end of the growing season (UC IPM, 2011). 

Control 
Unwanted plants can be manually removed before seeds 
mature to deplete the seedbank (DiTomaso and Healy, 
2007).  Managing stands with fire or other physical 
disturbance is not recommended for mustard species as 
this can increase populations.  Please contact your local 
agricultural extension specialist or county weed specialist 
to learn what works best in your area.  Always read label 
and safety instructions for each control method.   

Seeds and Plant Production 
Good seed production requires cross pollination by 
various insects.  One or two hives per acre can ensure 
good seed set (Duke, 1983).  Seed production fields need 
to have proper isolation distances among varieties and all 
other forms of B. juncea, B. campestris, and B. napus.  
Minimum isolation distances are mandated at the state or 
province level in the US and Canada, and for Brassicas 
they vary from ½ to 5 miles; in England, the minimum 
isolation distance is 3,000 ft, while in New Zealand it is 
1,300 ft.  Seeds will shatter when ripe, so the crop must 
be harvested just before the mature stage.  Canola seed 
yields average between 860 and 1,200 lb/acre in Canada, 

but can be as high as 4,000 lb/acre (Canola Council of 
Canada, 2012).  

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
Field mustard seed is generally available from 
commercial sources, but quantities may be limited, so it is 
best to check with seed suppliers a few months prior to 
planting.  A list of cover crop seed suppliers is available 
at http://mysare.sare.org/publications/covercrops/ 
appendixc.shtml (Clark, 2007). 
There are a number of horticultural cultivars of turnip and 
rapini, some of which have been bred for disease 
resistance, as well as cultivars of forage turnip bred for 
increased dry-matter yield or other traits.  ‘Green Globe’, 
‘York Globe’ (New Zealand), and ‘Sirius’ turnip 
(Sweden) are recommended for forage use in the Upper 
Midwest (Undersander et al., 1991). ‘Purple Top’, 
‘Forage Star’ (an aphid-tolerant variety), and ‘Green 
Globe’ have performed satisfactorily in Pennsylvania test 
plots (Penn State Extension, 2012).  ‘Macro Stubble’ and 
‘Kapai’ turnip had the highest dry matter yields in 
preliminary research farm trials in Massachusetts, while 
‘Topper’ turnip had the highest fresh forage yield in a 
later study (UMass Extension, 2012).  ‘Tyfon’, a high 
yielding variety that is a cross between forage turnip (B. 
rapa var. rapa) and Chinese cabbage (B. pekinensis), 
performs best under a multiharvest system. 

References 
Black, L.L. 2001. Fact sheet: turnip mosaic virus. In: 

Vegetable diseases: a practical guide. AVRDC-The 
World Vegetable Center. 
www.avrdc.org/LC/cabbage/tumv.html (accessed 1 
May 2012).  

Burrill, L.C., S.A. Dewey, D.W. Cudney, B.E. Nelson, 

R.D. Lee, R. Parker, T.D. Whitson (ed). 2006. Weeds 
of the west, 9th edition. Western Society of Weed 
Science with Western CSREES and Univ. of 
Wyoming, Laramie. 

Canola Council of Canada. 2012. 

www.canolacouncil.org/ (accessed 2 May 2012). 

Clark, A. (ed.) 2007. Managing cover crops profitably, 3rd 
ed. National SARE Outreach Handbook Series Book 
9. National Agricultural Laboratory, Beltsville, MD. 

DiTomaso, J.M., and E.A. Healy. 2007. Weeds of 

California and other western states. UC ANR Publ. 
3488. Univ. of California, Division of Agric. and Nat. 
Resources, Davis. 

Duke, J.A. 1983. Brassica rapa L. In: Handbook of 

energy crops. Center for New Crops & Plant 
Products, Purdue Univ. www.hort.purdue.edu/ 
newcrop/duke_energy/Brassica_rapa.html (accessed 
2 May 2012). 

Gulden, S.J., C.A. Martin, and D.L. Daniel. 1997a. 

Interseeding forage brassicas into sweet corn: forage 
productivity and effect on sweet corn yield. J. 
Sustainable Agriculture 11(2-3): 51-58. 

 

 

Gulden, S.J., C.A. Martin, and R.L. Steiner. 1997b. 
Interseeding forage brassicas into chile: forage 
productivity and effect on chile yield. J. Sustainable 
Agriculture 11(2-3):41-49. 

Hannaway, D.B., and C. Larson. 2004. Forage fact sheet: 

field mustard (Brassica rapa L. var. rapa). Oregon 
State Univ., Corvallis. http://forages.oregon 
state.edu/php/fact_sheet_print_ffor.php?SpecID=152
&use=Forage (accessed 1 May 2012). 

Jepson Flora Project. 2012 (v. 1.0). Jepson eFlora, 

Brassica rapa, I.A. Al-Shehbaz. 
http://ucjeps.berkeley.edu/cgi-bin/get_IJM.pl? 
tid=16081 (accessed 1 May 2012). 

Knodel, J.J., and D.L. Olson. 2002. Crucifer flea beetle 
biology and integrated pest management in canola. 
North Dakota State Univ. www.ag.ndsu.edu/ 
pubs/plantsci/pests/e1234w.htm (accessed 2 May 
2012).  

Madson, B.A. 1951. Winter covercrops. Circular 174. 

Agric. Ext. Serv., College of Agric., Univ. of 
California, Bekeley. http://archive.org/details/ 
wintercovercrops174mads (accessed 1 May 2012). 

MDA (Michigan Department of Agriculture). 2011. 

Michigan summary of plant protection regulations, 
updated March 1, 2011. Pesticide & Plant Pest 
Management Division. http://nationalplantboard.org/ 
docs/summaries//michigan.pdf (accessed 30 Apr. 
2012). 

Moerman, D. 2012. Brassica rapa. In: Native American 
Ethnobotany Database [Online]. Univ. of Michigan, 
Dearborn. http://herb.umd.umich.edu/herb/search.pl 
(accessed 1 May 2012). 

Olmstead, M.A. 2006. Cover crops as a floor management 

strategy for Pacific Northwest vineyards. EB2010. 
Washington State Univ. Extension, Prosser. 
http://cru.cahe.wsu.edu/CEPublications/eb2010/eb20
20.pdf (accessed 2 May 2012).   

Parker, K.F. 1972. An illustrated guide to Arizona weeds. 

4th edition 1990. Univ. of Arizona Press, Tucson. 
http://www.uapress.arizona.edu/onlinebks/WEEDS/G
GENERA.HTM (accessed 30 Apr. 2012). 

Penn State Extension. 2012. Pastures: annual forages for 
pastures. College of Agric. Sciences, Pennsylvania 
State Univ. http://extension.psu.edu/agronomy-
guide/cm/sec8/sec810d (accessed 2 May 2012). 
Plants for a Future. 2012. Brassica rapa L. In: Plant 

database [online]. 
www.pfaf.org/user/Plant.aspx?LatinName=Brassica+
rapa (accessed 2 May 2012). 

Pojar, J., and A. MacKinnon (ed.) 1994. Plants of the 

Pacific Northwest coast: Washington, Oregon, British 
Columbia & Alaska. BC Ministry of Forests and 
Lone Pine Publ., Vancouver. 

SAREP (Sustainable Agriculture Research and Education 

Program). 2012. Mustards. In: SAREP cover crops 
database. Agricultural Sustainability Institute, Univ. 
of California, Davis. 
www.sarep.ucdavis.edu/database/covercrops 
(accessed 1 May 2012).   

SWSS (Southern Weed Science Society). 1998. Weeds of 

the United States and Canada. CD-ROM. Southern 
Weed Science Society, Champaign, IL. 

Taylor, R.J. 1990. Northwest weeds: the ugly and 

beautiful villains of fields, gardens, and roadsides. 
Mountain Press Publ. Co., Missoula, MT. 

Thomet, P., and S. Kohler. 2003. Extending the grazing 

season with turnips. Utilisation of grazed grass in 
temperate animal systems, 229. In: Satellite 
Workshop on Utilisation of Grazed Grass in 
Temperate Animal Systems. Wageningen Academic 
Publ., Wageningen, Netherlands. 

Smith, J.D. Doll, E.E. Schulte, and E.S. Oplinger. 
1991. Turnip. In: Alternative field crops manual. 
Wisconsin and Minnesota Cooperative Extension, 
Univ. of Wisconsin, Madison, and Univ. of 
Minnesota, St. Paul. 
www.hort.purdue.edu/newcrop/afcm/turnip.html 
(accessed 2 May 2012). 

Turner, M., and P. Gustafson. 2006. Wildflowers of the 
Pacific Northwest. Timber Press, Inc., Portland, OR. 
UC IPM. 2011. Weed gallery: mustards. Statewide IPM 

Progr., Agric. and Nat. Resources, Univ. of 
California. www.ipm.ucdavis.edu/PMG/WEEDS/ 
mustards.html (accessed 1 May 2012). 

UMass Extension. 2012. Brassica fodder crops for fall 

grazing. Center for Agriculture, Univ. of 
Massachusetts, Amherst. http://extension.umass.edu/ 
cdle/fact-sheets/brassica-fodder-crops-fall-grazing 
(accessed 2 May 2012). 

Undersander, D.J., A.R. Kaminski, E.A. Oelke, L.H. 

USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database / Britton, N.L., and A. 

Brown. 1913. An illustrated flora of the northern 
United States, Canada and the British Possessions. 3 
vols. Charles Scribner's Sons, New York. Vol. 2: 193. 

Warwick, S.I. 2010. Brassica rapa. In: Flora of North 

America Editorial Committee (eds.), Flora of North 
America North of Mexico, Vol. 7 Magnoliophyta: 
Salicaceae to Brassicaceae. 
www.efloras.org/florataxon.aspx?flora_id=1&taxon_
id=200009273 (accessed 1 May 2012). 

Prepared By:   
Annie Young-Mathews, Conservation Agronomist 
USDA-NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials Center, Oregon 

Citation 
Young-Mathews, A. 2012. Plant guide for field mustard 
(Brassica rapa ssp. rapa). USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Plant Materials Center, Corvallis, 
OR.Published June 2012 
Edited: 03May2012 plsp; 17May2012 aj; 22May2012 cs  

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

