 
 

 

Plant Guide

current status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Description 
General:  Sideoats grama is a native, warm-season 
perennial bunchgrass.  It grows 3-4 feet tall.   The 
leaf blade is long, and is distinguished by papilla 
based hairs along the margin.  Variety caespitosa 
does not have rhizomes, and has an upright, 
caespitose growth form. The seedheads are numerous 
spikes with 10-30 spikelets generally oriented to one 
side of the rachis (Barkworth et al. 2007). 

Distribution:  The natural range of sideoats grama is 
throughout North America and continuing down into 
Central America. Variety caespitosa is generally 
found in the western portions of the species’ range. 
For current distribution, please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Adaptation 
Sideoats grama grows best on fine to medium 
textured soils.   

Establishment 
Seedbed preparation should begin well in advance of 
planting.  Planting can be scheduled for early spring 
or later summer-autumn.  Establish a clean, weed-
free seedbed by either tillage or herbicides.  Prior to 
planting, the site should be firm and have 
accumulated soil moisture.   
 
Sideoats grama is best seeded using a native-grass 
drill with picker wheels or medium to large seed box 
to ensure a good planting of the seed.  Broadcast 
seeding may be used in areas not easily planted with 
a drill, but some type of additional coverage such as 
culti-packing or light dragging will be beneficial to 
ensure good seed to soil contact. Seed should be 
planted 1/8 to 1/4 inch deep.  It is better to plant too 
shallow than too deep.   
 
If one plant per square foot has become established in 
field plantings, then the seeding can be considered 
successful. 

Management 
Sideoats grama should not be grazed the first year 
after planting.  After a stand is established, either 
continuous or rotational grazing can be used.  It is 
recommended that a minimum 6 inch stubble height 
be maintained under continuous grazing. Contact 
your local USDA-NRCS field office for assistance in 

SIDEOATS GRAMA 

Bouteloua curtipendula 

(Michx.) Torr. var. caespitosa 

Gould & Kapadia  

Plant Symbol = BOCUC 

 

 

Sideoats grama plant. Photo by Forrest Smith, South Texas 
Natives, Kingsville, TX. 

Contributed by:  USDA NRCS E. “Kika” de la Garza 
Plant Materials Center and South Texas Natives  

Uses 
Livestock: Sideoats grama (Bouteloua curtipendula 
[Michx.] Torr. var. caespitosa Gould & Kapadia) 
produces abundant forage on many range sites.  It 
provides moderate to high quality forage for all types 
of grazing livestock.   
 
Wildlife:  Sideoats grama provides fair forage for 
wildlife.  It also provides good nesting cover for 
upland game birds and escape cover for all wildlife. 

Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 

 

planning and applying prescribed grazing.  Plants 
should be allowed to produce seed annually to insure 
stand health.  Sideoats grama is a long-lived 
perennial that is extremely drought and fire tolerant 
once established.   

Pests and Potential Problems 
Thrips and rice stink bugs can limit seed production 
on seed production fields. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
There are no known environmental concerns 
associated with sideoats grama.   
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Seed increase plots have been managed on 36” 
bedded rows, however flat plantings may be possible 
with adequate weed control. Sideoats grama can also 
be established with vegetative transplants.  Rapid 
spread and growth has been observed in transplant 
established stands providing seed harvests within the 
first year.  Furthermore transplants facilitate better 
weed control in the seed production fields.  Deep soil 
tillage or frequent close cultivation is recommended 
to promote seed production.   
 
Seed can be harvested with a Flail-Vac or combine.  
To clean stems and chaff from harvests, a Clipper 
seed cleaner has been used. Sideoats grama can 
produce multiple seed crops per year when grown in 
cultivation.  The quantity and quality of seed harvests 
vary greatly depending on location and field 
conditions.   

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 

 

South Texas Germplasm sideoats grama was released 
by South Texas Natives, the E. “Kika” de la Garza 
Plant Materials Center, and Texas AgriLife Research 
Beeville in 2012.  It was selected for its survivability, 
plant vigor, forage production and seed production 
characteristics.  This germplasm is known to be 
adapted to the Rio Grande Plain, Gulf Coast Prairies 
and Marshes, and Coastal Sand Plains Ecoregions of 
south Texas.   
 
For calibration purposes, South Texas Germplasm 
contains approximately 165,000 seeds per bulk 
pound.  A seeding rate of 5-10 pounds of pure live 
seed (PLS) per acre is recommended.  In planting 
mixtures reduce the rate according to the percent of 
sideoats grama desired on the planting site.  Breeder 
seed is maintained by South Texas Natives.     

Well managed seed fields of South Texas Germplasm 
have produced 80-350 bulk pounds of clean seed per 
year.  Purity of the seed is usually around 50% and 
germination rates range from 5-20%.  South Texas 
Germplasm has a large amount of dormant seed.  It 

 

 

 

produces four seed crops per year when grown under 
irrigation in South Texas.   
 
‘Butte’ was selected at Nebraska AES, Lincoln, 
USDA-ARS and SCS cooperatively by E.C. Conard 
and L.C. Newell. It represents native collections from 
Holt and Platte Counties in Nebraska that were 
combined and tested as Nebraska 37. Repeated field 
plantings revealed superior germination and 
establishment characteristics when compared with 
other sources. 
 
‘El Reno’ was released cooperatively in 1944 by the 
SCS, Manhattan, Kansas Plant Materials Center and 
Kansas AES. The original seed was collected in a 
field location near El Reno, Oklahoma in 1934. The 
material was outstanding for leafiness, forage 
production and vigor. It also ranked well for disease 
resistance, seed production, and winter hardiness. It 
is widely used in range seedings and is adapted to 
Kansas, Oklahoma and northern Texas. 
 
‘Haskell’ was released in 1983 by the James E. 
“Bud” Smith Plant Materials Center, Texas AES and 
USDA-ARS. The seed for this release was originally 
collected in 1960 by J.C. Yeary, Jr. in Haskell, Texas. 
It was selected based on rhizome production and 
adaptation as far south as the Rio Grande Valley in 
Texas. It is also known for its high forage palatability 
and prolific seed production. 
 
Killdeer was informally released in the late 1960’s by 
the Bismarck Plant Materials Center in Bismarck, 
ND. It is composed of seed collected from native 
stands in 1956 near Bowman, Bowman County and 
Killdeer, Dunn County, North Dakota. Killdeer 
possesses outstanding vigor, leafiness, fair seed 
production, freedom from disease and persistence in 
a cold, semi-arid environment.  
 
‘Niner’ was released in 1984 by SCS and the New 
Mexico and Colorado AES. The original seed for the 
release was collected by G.C. Niner and J.A. 
Anderson in 1957 west of Socorro, New Mexico. 
Niner was a bulk increase of the collection made by 
Niner and Anderson.  
 
Pierre was informally released in 1961 by the 
Bismarck Plant Materials Center and the South 
Dakota AES. The original seed for the release was 
collected in 1954 in Stanley County west of Pierre, 
South Dakota. The release is described as outstanding 
in vigor, leafiness, freedom from disease, seedling 
vigor and persistence in a semi-arid environment.  
 
‘Premier’ was released in 1960 cooperatively by 
Texas AES and USDA-ARS and NRCS. The original 
seed was collected in 1953 from a single plant 
growing between Cuauhtemoc and Chichuahua, 
Mexico. The release is described as having good 

 

seedling vigor, good seed yield, drought tolerance, 
upright growth form and leafiness.  
 
‘Trailway’ was cooperatively released in 1958 by 
Nebraska AES and USDA-ARS. The original seed 
was collected in 1953 in northern Holt County by 
L.C. Newell. The release is described as winter 
hardy, long lived, late maturing with a somewhat 
indeterminate heading and flowering response. 
Requires most of the growing season to mature a crop 
in eastern Nebraska and may fail to produce seed in 
areas with a shorter growing season. 
 
‘Vaughn’ was released in 1940 by the New Mexico 
AES and SCS Plant Science Division. The original 
seed was collected from native stands in 1935 near 
Vaughn, New Mexico. The release is described as 
slightly variable, but all have erect leaves, good 
seedling vigor and easy to establish.  
 
Northern, Central and Southern Iowa Germplasms 
were released in 1995 as source identified releases, 
by the Elsberry Plant Materials Center, University of 
Northern Iowa, Iowa Department of Transportation, 
Iowa Crop Improvement Association and NRVC. 
They are all composite lines from collections made in 
Northern, Central and Southern Iowa. 

 
References 
Barkworth, M.E., L.K. Anderton, K.M. Capels, S. 

Long, and M.B. Piep. 2007. Manual of  
Grasses for North America.  Intermountain 
Herbarium and Utah State University Press. Logan, 
UT. 

SCS 1983. Notice of Release of ‘Haskell’ sideoats 
grama.  United States Department of Agriculture. 
Washington, D.C. 

SCS 1984. Notice of Release of ‘Niner’ sideoats 

grama.  United States Department of Agriculture. 
Washington, D.C. 
 

 

Smith, F.S., A.D. Falk, and W.R. Ocumpaugh 2012.  

Notice of Release of South Texas Germplasm 
Sideoats grama.  Caesar Kleberg Wildlife Research 
Institute. Kingsville, TX. 

USDA NRCS 2010. Plant Guide: Side-oats grama.  
http://plants.usda.gov/plantguide/pdf/pg_bocu.pdf 

USDA NRCS 2011.  ‘El Reno’ sideoats grama. 

http://www.plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov/pubs/kspmcrb10371.pdf 

 
 
Prepared By:   
John Lloyd-Reilley, Manager 
USDA-NRCS, E. “Kika” de la Garza Plant Materials 
Center, Kingsville, Texas 
 
Forrest S. Smith, Director 
South Texas Natives, Caesar Kleberg Wildlife 
Research Institute, Texas A&M University-
Kingsville, Kingsville, Texas  

Citation 
Lloyd-Reilley, J.  and F. Smith. 2012.  Plant guide for 
South Texas Germplasm sideoats grama. USDA-
Natural Resources Conservation Service, E. “Kika” 
de la Garza Plant Materials Center and South Texas 
Natives, Caesar Kleberg Wildlife Research Institute, 
Texas A&M University-Kingsville, Kingsville, Texas 
78363.   

Published July 2012 

For more information about this and other plants, 
please contact your local NRCS field office or 
Conservation District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ 
and visit the PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant Materials Program 
Web site http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or 
availability of other Web sites. 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

