 
 

 

Plant Guide

cover to small vertebrates. The seeds are likely eaten by 
birds and rodents. Its primary value is as a pollinator food 
source. 
 
Ethnobotanical: Yellow beeplant was used in ceremonial 
medicine by the Navajo and Kayenta peoples. It was also 
used as a dermatological aid for ant bites (Moerman, 
1998). Some Plateau Indian tribes used the stems and 
flowers to create an infusion for a treatment for cold 
(Hunn, 1990). 

Status 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State Department 
of Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values). 

Description 
General:  Formerly placed in the Caper family 
(Capparaceae) but now considered an early offshoot of 
the cabbage family (Brassicaceae). Yellow beeplant is a 
tap rooted annual forb. It has one to several branched or 
simple erect stems reaching 0.3 to 1.5 m (60 in) in height. 
The leaves are palmate with 3 to 5 oblong to lanceolate 
leaflets, each leaflet 1 to 5 cm (0.4 to 2.0 in) long and 2 to 
10 mm (0.08 to 0.4 in) wide. The inflorescence is a 
terminal indeterminate raceme. The flowers are similar to 
those found in the mustard family (Brassicaceae). They 
have four petals, four sepals, 6 stamens and the fruit is a 
two-valved silique. The petals are yellow, approximately 
6 mm (0.25 in) long (Spellenberg, 1994). The stamens, 
unlike those in the mustard family, are long and greatly 
exerted from the flower. The fruit also differs from a 
mustard fruit in that the pod sits atop a 6 to 12 mm (0.25 
to 0.5 in) long stalk or stipe (Welsh and others 2003). The 
pod is 1 to 4 cm (0.4 to 1.6 in) long and bears 
approximately 8, 2 to 4 mm (0.08 to 0.16 in) diameter 
seeds (Cane, 2008). Seed counts range from 150,000 to 
220,000 seeds/kg (70,000 to 100,000 seeds/lb) (Cane, 
2008; USDA-NRCS, 2011). 
 
Yellow beeplant plants produced two types of flowers, 
hermaphroditic and staminate (Cane, 2008). The 
staminate flowers begin as hermaphroditic buds, but the 
pistil fails to completely form. Racemes alternate between 
staminate and hermaphroditic flower production 
(Murneek, 1937). When the raceme is laden with 
developing fruit, the plant switches to staminate flower 
production. This allows the plant to produce fruit 
indeterminately throughout the blooming period (Cane, 
2008). 
 

YELLOW BEEPLANT 

Cleome lutea Hook.  
Plant Symbol = CLLU2 

 
Contributed by:  NRCS Plant Materials Center, Aberdeen, 
ID 

Yellow beeplant. Photo by Al Schneider @ USDA-NRCS PLANTS 
Database. 

Alternate Names 
Beeflower, yellow spiderflower; Nevada bee plant 
Peritoma lutea 

Uses 
Pollinator: Yellow beeplant is a valuable native forage 
species for bees wasps and butterflies. Over 140 species 
of native bees have been observed foraging for nectar or 
pollen on yellow beeplant in southern Utah (Cane, 2008). 
Yellow beeplant is an annual forb which could provide 
food to insects in the first growing season of a range 
seeding (Ogle and others, 2011a). This available food 
source could sustain pollinators until perennial forb 
species produce flowers, typically in the second growing 
season. 
 
Range revegetation: Yellow beeplant has potential for use 
in range seedings throughout the arid to semi-arid regions 
of the Intermountain West. It provides little to no forage 
to large mammals, and its sparse stems provide limited 
 

Yellow beeplant is self-fertile. The stamens coil inward in 
the latter part of the day causing the anthers and pollen to 
come in contact with the stigma (Cane, 2008). 
 

 

Flower, fruit and seed of yellow beeplant. Photo by Jim Cane, USDA 
ARS, Logan, Utah 
 
Distribution: Yellow beeplant is known to occur in arid to 
semi-arid regions from the central Great Plains to 
Washington and south to California and New Mexico. For 
current distribution, consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site. 

Habitat: Yellow beeplant grows in warm and cold desert 
shrub communities in desert to semi-desert plains and 
valleys (Welsh and others, 2003). It can be found growing 
among or near shadscale, sagebrush, horsebrush pinyon-
juniper and black greasewood plant communities. It is 
often found in disturbed areas or areas formerly filled 
with water (Spellenberg, 1994). The plants reseed readily 
and often form large colonies in recently disturbed areas. 
Its ability to self pollinate, allows populations to increase 
in disturbed areas that may have sparse  native pollinators 
(Cane, 2008). 

 

A yellow beeplant population in its native habitat. Photo by Jim Cane, 
USDA ARS, Logan, Utah 
 
Adaptation 
Yellow beeplant is adapted to fine to medium textured 
soils in the 20 to 45 cm (8 to 18 in) precipitation zone 
(USDA-NRCS, 2011). It tolerates a pH range of 

approximately 6.0 to 8.0 (USDA-NRCS, 2011). This 
species is not shade tolerant and prefers open, disturbed 
sites with well-drained soil. 
 
Establishment 
Yellow beeplant should be planted in late fall to allow for 
natural stratification. Yellow beeplant has been most 
successfully established in areas where winter soils are 
moist. Fall plantings have been successful in Logan, Utah 
where soils remain wet during most of the winter. No 
germination was observed in field plantings in Worland, 
Wyoming, where dry soils prevail during the winter. It 
should be seeded with a drill or broadcast into a weed-free 
seed bed at a depth of 3 to 6 mm (0.125 to 0.25 in). The 
full stand seeding rate is 11 kg pure live seed (PLS) per ha 
(10 lbs PLS per acre).  When planted in a mixture, the 
seeding rate of yellow beeplant should be adjusted to 
reflect the desired proportion of the mix. 
 
Management 
Yellow beeplant should be used as a minor component of 
restoration seed mixtures. Management strategies should 
be based on the key species in the established plant 
community. Grazing should be deferred on seeded lands 
for at least two growing seasons to allow for full stand 
establishment (Ogle and others, 2011b).  
 
Yellow beeplant is a capable colonizer of disturbed areas. 
The plants readily reseed and produce volunteers. In 
disturbed or burned areas with limited pollinators, the 
plants can self-pollinate and increase in numbers.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Powdery mildew (Leveillula taurica) has been observed 
on yellow beeplant. Western cabbage flea beetles 
(Phyllotreta cruciferae) have been observed causing 
significant damage to yellow beeplant foliage. 

Environmental Concerns 
Yellow beeplant is native to western North America. It 
will spread under favorable conditions but does not pose 
any environmental concern to native plant communities. 

Seed and Plant Production 
Yellow beeplant seed requires a cold stratification or 
vernalization period to germinate (B&T World Seed, 
2011). Seed should be stratified in lightly moistened peat 
or sand at 4 to 5° C (39 to 41° F) for 30 to 190 days. 
Stratified seed will germinate in 10 to 14 days after 
planting under greenhouse conditions. 
 
Although yellow beeplant is self-fertile, pollinators are 
required for maximum seed production. Plants with 
access to pollinators produced two to three times more 
fruit than self-pollinating plants (Cane, 2008). Native bees 
are not necessary for pollination. Commercially managed 
generalist bee species such as European honeybee (Apis 
mellifera) and alfalfa leaf-cutting bees (Megachile 

 

 

rotundata) can be utilized for pollination of seed 
production fields. 

 

Fruit and seed of yellow beeplant ripen indeterminately. 
This poses difficulties in harvesting seed for maximum 
yield. Yields of mature seed can be increased by leaving 
swathed plants to dry for a week before harvesting seed. 
Seed can also be harvested by hand or by using a vacuum-
type harvester. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
Common wildland collected seed is available through 
commercial sources. There are currently no commercial 
releases of yellow beeplant.  
 
References 
B & T World Seeds. 2011. URL: b-and-t-world-

seeds.com. (accessed Nov. 15, 2011). Aigues-Vives, 
France. 

Cane, J. 2008. Breeding biologies, seed production and 
species-rich bee guilds of Cleome lutea and Cleome 
serrulata (Cleomaceae). Plant Species Biology 23: 
152-158. 

Holmgren, N.H., Holmgren, P.K. and A. Cronquist. 2005. 

Intermountain Flora: Vascular plants of the 
Intermountain West. New York: The New York 
Botanical Garden. 488 p. 

Hunn, E.S. 1990. Nch’i-Wana, “The Big River”: Mid-
Columbia Indians and Their Land. University of 
Washington Press. 352p. 

Moerman, D.E. 1998. Native American Ethnobotany. 

Timber Press. 927 p.  

Murneek, A.E. 1937. The physiological basis of 

intermittent sterility with special reference to the 
spider flower. University of Missouri Agricultural 
Experiment Station Research Bulletin 106: 1-37. 
Ogle, D., Tilley, D., Cane, J.,  St. John, L., Fullen, K., 
Stannard, M., and P. Pavek. 2011. Technical Note 
2A: Plants for pollinators in the Intermountain West. 
USDA-NRCS. Boise, ID. ID-TN2A. 40p. 

Ogle, D., St. John, L.,. Stannard, M. and L. Holzworth. 

2011. Technical Note 24: Conservation plant species 
for the Intermountain West. USDA-NRCS, Boise, 
ID-Salt Lake City, UT-Spokane, WA. ID-TN 24. 
57p. 

 

Spellenberg, , R. 1994. National Audubon Society Field 

Guide to North American Wildflowers, Western 
Region. Alfred A. Knopf, Inc. New York, NY.862 p. 
[USDA NRCS] USDA Natural Resources Conservation 

Service. 2011. The PLANTS Database. URL: 
http://plants.usda.gov (accessed Nov. 8, 2011). Baton 
Rouge (LA): National Plant Data Center. 

Welsh, S.L., Atwood, N.D. Goodrich, S., and L.C. 

Higgins. 2003. A Utah Flora. Third Edition, revised. 
Brigham Young University, Provo, UT. 

 
Prepared By 
Derek Tilley, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho 
 
Jim Cane. USDA-ARS. Bee Biology and Systematics 
Laboratory. Logan, Utah. 
 
Loren St. John, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho 
 
Dan Ogle, USDA NRCS, Boise, Idaho 
 
Nancy Shaw. USDA-FS. Rocky Mountain Research 
Station. Boise, Idaho. 
 
Citation 
Tilley, D., Cane, J., St. John, L., Ogle, D. and N. Shaw. 
2012. Plant guide for yellow beeplant (Cleome lutea). 
USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service. 
Aberdeen, ID. 

Published January 2012 
Edited: 16Nov11djt; 17Nov1ls;18Nov11jc 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

