 
 

 

Plant Guide

PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/. Also 
consult related web sites listed in PLANTS for this 
species for further information. 

Description 
General: The rosette of yellow star-thistle lies close 
to the ground (see Figure 2) and produces six to 28 
deeply lobed leaves that range from one to eight 
inches (2.5 to 20 centimeters) long and are generally 
less than two inches (5 centimeters) wide. The rigidly 
branched, winged flowering stems (see Figure 2) 
average about two feet (60 centimeters) tall, but 
range from four inches (10 centimeters) to five feet 
(1.5 meters), depending on environmental conditions. 
The stem leaves are entire without lobes, linear in 
shape, and are vested with woolly hairs that persist 
through the growing season. Flower heads are 
solitary on the ends of short stems and have many 
bright yellow flowers (see Figure1). The bracts of the 
flower heads are armed with stout, straw-colored 
spines one to two inches (2.5 to 5 centimeters) long 
that radiate from the flower head in a star shape. 
 

 
Figure 2. A yellow star-thistle rosette and flowering 
stem showing leaf shapes and the winged stem. Photo by 
Jane Mangold, Montana State University, Bozeman, 
Montana. 

YELLOW STAR-

THISTLE 

Centaurea solstitialis L. 

Plant Symbol = CESO3 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS Montana/Wyoming 
Plant Materials Program 

Figure 1. Yellow star-thistle flower heads. Photo by 
Mark Stannard, USDA-NRCS Pullman Plant Materials 
Center, Pullman, Washington. 

 

Alternate Names 
Yellow starthistle 

Uses 
Flowers provide nectar for honey bees. 

Status 
Yellow star-thistle is a listed noxious weed and is 
invasive in many western states. Consult the 
PLANTS Web site and your State Department of 
Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious 
status, and wetland indicator values). 

Weediness 
Yellow star-thistle is one of the more invasive weeds 
of the Intermountain West and Pacific Northwest. A 
report from 2003 estimated that yellow star-thistle 
has infested nearly 15 million acres in 17 western 
states. This plant is weedy and invasive in some 
regions or habitats and often displaces desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed. Consult with 
your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, state natural resource, or 
state agriculture department regarding its status and 
use. Weed information is also available from the 

 

Distribution: Yellow star-thistle is native to the 
Mediterranean region. It has been reported in most 
states in the United States and in four Canadian 
Provinces. For current distribution, consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 

Habitat: Yellow star-thistle prefers deep loamy soils 
with south facing slopes and 12 to 25 inches or more 
of annual rainfall with a bimodal distribution in the 
fall and spring. It favors perennial bunchgrass 
communities dominated by bluebunch wheatgrass, 
Idaho fescue, and Sandberg’s bluegrass. Although it 
does not compete well with sagebrush, it readily 
invades sagebrush communities after disturbance. It 
is most common in disturbed areas in full sun, such 
as rangelands, along highways or roads, railroad 
tracks and other transportation or communication 
lines. In Montana small patches have occurred along 
road sides, in new alfalfa seedings (from 
contaminated seed) and other disturbed areas such as 
construction lots. Because patches were controlled 
before they could establish and spread, it is unknown 
if certain regions or plant community types in 
Montana are more vulnerable. In Idaho large areas of 
canyon grasslands, rangelands, pasture, roadsides and 
other disturbed areas primarily in western to northern 
regions are infest with yellow star-thistle. Research in 
west central Idaho found rangelands with south to 
southwest aspects and 20-30% plus slopes were most 
vulnerable to yellow star-thistle invasion. In eastern 
Oregon it is common in grassland foothills. In 
Washington it is common on south-facing grassland 
slopes, primarily in the south eastern part of the state. 
In California it is prevalent in the Central Valley and 
surrounding foothills and continues into mountainous 
regions below 7,000 feet (2,100 meters). 

Adaptation 
In its native range, yellow star-thistle evolved under 
Mediterranean climatic conditions characterized by 
precipitation in the fall and spring, and dry conditions 
in the winter and summer. 

Establishment 
Yellow star-thistle is a winter annual dependent on 
seed production for population growth and spread. 
Plants normally produce 20 to 120 seeds each, but 
under ideal conditions production may exceed 
100,000 seeds per plant. Up to 90 percent of the 
seeds have a short plume (pappus). These seeds 
disperse at maturity and readily germinate when 
moisture is available in the fall. The other 10 percent 
lack a plume, disperse over winter, and may remain 
dormant in the soil for two to three years. One-
quarter to one-half inch (0.6 to 1.3 centimeters) of 
rain in the fall is sufficient to stimulate germination 
and seedling emergence. Seedling densities in have 
been reported as high as 2,500 per square foot. 
Populations overwinter as seedlings or rosettes. Seed 
can also germinate in the spring.  

 

 

Beginning in March and continuing through May, 
seedlings transition into rosettes. Normally, between 
60 and 75 percent of the rosettes die from self-
thinning and moisture stress. Surviving rosettes 
produce a tap root capable of penetrating deeply into 
the soil to access deep soil moisture. A flower stalk 
grows from surviving rosettes and blooms in mid-
summer. Flowers are primarily pollinated by 
honeybees (Apis spp.) and bumblebees (Bombus 
spp.), and germinable seed is produced eight days 
after flower initiation. Spring emerging seedlings are 
capable of blooming in the year of emergence or 
overwintering to bloom in the following year. 

Management 
See Control below 

Pests and Potential Problems 
See the biological control section under Control 
below. 

Environmental Concerns 
Yellow star-thistle is problematic on canyon lands, 
rangelands, pastures, roadsides, and disturbed areas. 
Its rapid growth rate and aggressive resource 
acquisition make it competitive in native plant 
communities where it forms dense stands displacing 
native species and reducing diversity. Loss of native 
bunchgrasses reduces available forage for livestock 
and wildlife, and the long, stout spines on the flowers 
deter grazing. Consumption of yellow star-thistle by 
horses causes chewing disease, a fatal nervous 
disorder. Rosettes can be grazed by cattle and sheep 
before the spiny flower heads form. 

Control 
Contact your local agricultural Extension specialist or 
county weed specialist to learn what works best in 
your area and how to use it safely. Always read label 
and safety instructions for each control method. 
Trade names and control measures appear in this 
document only to provide specific information. 
USDA NRCS does not guarantee or warranty the 
products and control methods named, and other 
products may be equally effective. 

Herbicide: There are many herbicides effective for 
controlling yellow star-thistle including glyphosate, 
2,4-D, picloram, dicamba, clopyralid and others. For 
optimal population regulation, herbicide should be 
applied at the transitional stage from rosettes to 
flowers and before the population has advanced 
beyond the 2% flower initiation stage. 

Biological: Five insect species have been released in 
the western United States for the management and 
control of yellow star-thistle. They feed on the flower 
buds and seedheads and can reduce seed production 
from 45 to 100 percent. There is also a rust fungus 
that reduces the vigor of yellow star-thistle plants. 

 

Burning: Prescribed fire has been effective in 
reducing populations. Burns conducted for three 
consecutive years in late June and early July after the 
dispersal of desirable grass seed but before yellow 
star-thistle seed production, reduced the yellow star-
thistle seed bank, seedling density, and summer 
vegetative cover each by over 90 percent. 

Hand pulling: Hand pulling that removes the root 
crown is effective for new, small introductions of 
yellow star-thistle. To prevent seed dispersal, 
flowering plants should be destroyed in a hot fire or 
bagged and disposed of in an appropriate landfill. 
Repeated monitoring should be planned for every two 
to four weeks during the growing season. 

Mowing: Where the plant is dense and widespread, 
timely mowing over a three-year period has reduced 
plant density. Mowing may reduce seed production, 
but it does not eliminate it, and may serve to spread 
seed. When mowing is followed by rain, seed 
production may increase. Always clean mowing 
machinery before moving to weed-free areas. 

Tillage: Tillage will control yellow star-thistle in 
annual cropping systems. On disturbed sites 
vulnerable to weed invasion, tillage should be 
considered as a seedbed preparation prior to 
revegetation. Quickly establishing competitive, 
desired vegetation following disturbance may 
decrease the chance for invasive weeds like yellow 
star-thistle to become established. 

Seed and Plant Production Not applicable 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) Not applicable 

References 
Benwefield, C.B., J.M. DiTomaso, and G.B. Kyser. 

2001. Reproductive biology of yellow star-
thistle: maximizing late-season control. Weed 
Science 49:83-90. 

DiTomaso, J.M. 2005. Yellow star-thistle (Centaurea 

: C.L. Duncan and J.K. Clark 

solstitialis L.). In
(eds), Invasive plants of range and wildlands and 
their environmental, economic, and societal 
impacts. Weed Science Society of America, 
Lawrence, KS. Pages 36-50. 

DiTomaso, J.M., M.S. Hastings, and G.B. Kyser. 

1999. Prescribed burning for control of yellow 
star-thistle (Centaurea solstitialis) and enhanced 
native plant diversity. Weed Science 47:233-242. 

Pitcairn, M.J., G.L. Piper, and E.M. Coombs. 2004. 
Yellow Star-thistle. In
: Coombs, E.M., Coombs, 
J.K. Clark, G.L. Piper, and A.F. Cofrancesco, Jr. 
(eds), Biological control of invasive plants in the 
United States. Oregon State University Press, 
Corvallis, OR. Pages 233-262. 

Sheley, R.L. and L.L. Larson. 1997. Cheatgrass and 

yellow star-thistle growth at 3 soil depths. 
Journal of Range Management 50: 146-150. 

Sheley, R.L., L.L. Larson, and J.S. Jacobs. 1999. 
: Sheley, R.L. and J.K. 

Yellow Star-thistle. In
Petroff (eds), Biology and Management of 
Noxious Rangeland Weeds. Oregon State Press, 
Corvallis, OR. Pages 408-416. 

Prepared By: Jim Jacobs, Plant Materials Specialist, 
USDA NRCS Montana State Office, Bozeman, 
Montana 

Jane Mangold, Extension Invasive Plant Specialist, 
Montana State University, Bozeman, Montana 

Hilary Parkinson, Research Associate, Montana State 
University, Bozeman, Montana 

Melissa Medley, Extension Weeds Integrated Pest 
Management Specialist, Montana State University, 
Bozeman, Montana 

Dan Ogle, Plant Materials Specialist, USDA NRCS, 
Boise, Idaho 

Citation 
Jacobs, J., J. Mangold, H. Parkinson, and M. Graves. 
2011. Plant Guide for Yellow Star-thistle (Centaurea 
solstitialis). USDA-Natural Resources Conservation 
Service, Montana State Office. Mozeman, Montana 
59715. 

Published September 2011

Edited: 18July2011 jsj; 1Aug2011 mm, 3Aug2011 
jm; 8Aug2011 hp; 25Aug2011 dgo 

For more information about this and other plants, 
please contact your local NRCS field office or 
Conservation District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ 
and visit the PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant Materials Program 
Web site http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or 
availability of other Web sites. 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

