 
 

 

Plant Guide

Douglas’ dustymaiden can be used as part of a native forb 
component in wildland seedings to increase biodiversity, 
improve wildlife habitat, and provide food for numerous 
birds and mammals.  Douglas’ dustymaiden is readily 
visited by pollinators and other insect species. It is 
considered an important species for sage grouse during 
brood rearing because of its insect associations.  
 
Ethnobotanic: 
Douglas’ dustymaiden was commonly used by Native 
Americans to treat a variety of health problems. A 
poultice of Douglas’ dustymaiden was used by Native 
Americans to treat swelling, sores and aches (Foster and 
Hobbs, 2002; Moerman, 1998). A tea made from the plant 
was used to slow heart rates in children (Foster and 
Hobbs, 2002; Moerman, 1998) and for indigestion and 
headaches. 
 
Status 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State Department 
of Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General: Sunflower family (Asteraceae). Douglas’ 
dustymaiden is a biennial or short-lived perennial forb 
developing from a basal rosette of grayish multi-lobed to 
lacey leaves. Flowering stems generally reach 30 to 60 cm 
tall (12 to 24 in) and are topped with white to pinkish 
composite flowers (figure 1). The fruit is a golden to 
black achene, approximately 8 mm (0.3 in) long with 10 
to 16 membranous pappus scales (Welsh et al. 2003).  
There are approximately 342,500 seeds/lb (USDA NRCS 
PLANTS Database, 2010.).  
 
Cytogeographic studies have revealed multiple ploidy 
levels present in the Chaenactis douglasii complex 
(Mooring, 1980). Mooring reported chromosome counts 
of 2n=12, 13, 14, 15, 18, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 37 and ca 38. 
Mooring also noted that diploid populations primarily 
occur in the mountains of the Pacific and Rocky 
Mountain Regions, while polyploids inhabit the 
intervening plateaus. Mooring also found ploidy level to 
be correlated with the age of geologic substrate. 
 
This species is morphologically diverse and has been 
treated by taxonomists as a single species or as up to ten 
different species with six varieties. The PLANTS 
Database currently recognizes one species with two 
varieties, douglasii and alpina (USDA, 2010). 
 
Variety douglasii are larger statured biennials or 
perennials, typically from 10 to 50 cm (4 to 20 in) tall, 

DUSTYMAIDEN 

Chaenactis douglasii (Hook.) 

DOUGLAS’ 

Hook. & Arn. 

Plant Symbol = CHDO 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Idaho Plant Materials 
Program 
 

 
Figure 1. Douglas’ dustymaiden plant and flower (inset).  Photo by 
Derek Tilley. 

 
Alternate Names 
Duskymaiden, Chaenactis,  False yarrow, Morning brides, 
Pincushion, C. angustifolia Greene, C. pedicularia 
Greene, C. pumila Greene, C. ramosa Stockwell 
 
Uses 
Restoration/reclamation: 
Douglas’ dustymaiden is an early colonizer of disturbed 
sites. It is commonly found on roadsides and gravel pits 
competing against invasive species such as cheatgrass and 
knapweed species.  
It has also been found to be among the most successful 
native pioneer forb species on a broad variety of mining 
waste rock surfaces (Borden and Black, 2005).  
 
Wildlife: 

 

while variety alpina are shorter perennials (5 to 10 cm 
tall)  (2 to 4 in) and are typically caespitose or mat 
forming  (Moorefield, 2006).  
 
Distribution: 
Dustymaiden occurs throughout western North America 
at elevations from 1,000- 3,000 m (3,000- 10,000 ft) from 
British Columbia to Arizona, ranging as far east as South 
Dakota. Variety douglasii is known in and east of the 
Sierra and Cascade ranges extending to the western edge 
of northern Great Plains. For current distribution, consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site. 
 
Habitat:  
The species can be found in a variety of plant 
communities including shadscale, sagebrush steppe, 
pinyon-juniper, mountain brush and pine-fir forests in 
areas receiving 10 to 60 inches annual precipitation 
(USDA-NRCS, 2009).  
 
Adaptation 
Douglas’ dustymaiden is adapted to a wide range of soil 
conditions ranging from acidic to moderately basic. The 
species is found growing in medium to coarse textured 
well drained soils with a pH of 4.2 to 7.9 and electrical 
conductivity of 0.06 to 2.5 dS/m (Borden and Black, 
2005). Douglas’ dustymaiden requires full exposure to 
sunlight and a minimum 10 inch rooting depth (USDA-
NRCS, 2009). 
 
Establishment 
Seed can be surface sown in greenhouse containers in 
spring and transplanted when plants are large enough to 
disturb (Coffey, 1993). Parkinson and DeBolt (2005) 
reported 12% germination from 30 day cold moist 
stratification at 4° C (39° F); however no tetrazolium tests 
were conducted to determine seed viability prior to the 
experiment. A common garden study comparing 15 
populations of Douglas’ dustymaiden from Idaho, Utah 
and Nevada had establishment percentages ranging from 
66 to 98% (Tilley and St. John, 2010) from seed that was 
field-planted in November and allowed to undergo natural 
stratification. 
 
Seed should be drilled or broadcast seeded in late fall into 
a firm, weed-free seed bed at a depth of 0 to 6 mm (0 to 
0.25 in). For a pure stand, target delivery of 20 to 30 pure 
live seeds (PLS) per square foot, seed at a rate of 3.5 lb 
(1.6 kg) PLS per acre. If seeding as part of a mix, adjust 
seeding rate to the desired percentage of the mixture. 
Broadcast seedings should be followed with a cultipacker 
to ensure good seed to soil contact.  
 
Seed should be mixed with a dilutent such as rice hulls to 
assist seed flow through seeding equipment. When 
calculating rice hull amounts based on seed bushel 
weights, it is important to determine the condition of the 
seed. Douglas’ dustymaiden seed which has not had the 

 

 

pappus removed has a bushel weight of approximately 3 
lb/bu, while seed which has had the pappus removed by 
milling or brushing can have bushel weights of up to 15 
lb/bu.   
 
Management 
When planted in a native reclamation mix, it will be a 
minor component of the establishing plant community; 
therefore management should be based on other key 
species in the mixture.   
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no known pests or problems associated with 
Douglas’ dustymaiden. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
There are no known environmental concerns associated 
with Douglas’ dustymaiden. 
 
Seed and Plant Production 
Seed production fields of Douglas’ dustymaiden can be 
planted into weed barrier fabric at 23 to 30 cm (9 to 12to 
18 in) spacing. Seed should be planted in late fall into 
slightly roughened soil and then lightly packed. Plants 
grown in weed barrier fabric at Aberdeen, Idaho (an 8- 12 
inch mean annual rainfall zone) required no supplemental 
irrigation (Tilley and St. John, 2010). Effects of irrigation 
on plant growth and seed production have not been 
evaluated.  Flowering begins in early summer and 
continues for several weeks. Seed can be harvested by 
hand, flailvac or direct combined. Harvested seed should 
be dried to 12% moisture and stored in a freezer for at 
least 48 hrs to remove pests (Parkinson and DeBolt, 
2005).  
 
Weed control efforts should begin prior to planting. 
Planting into a weed-free seed bed, or using weed barrier 
fabric greatly reduces management inputs. Weeds can be 
controlled using pre-emergent herbicides and by hand 
rouging. Weedy grasses can be controlled with selective 
herbicides.  
 
Always read and follow label and safety instructions for 
each control method.  USDA-NRCS does not guarantee 
or warranty any products or control methods named, and 
other products may be equally effective. 
 
Douglas’ dustymaiden plants provide pollen and nectar to 
a variety of insect visitors. Insect surveys at the Aberdeen 
Plant Materials Center showed visitation by: sweat bees 
(Halictus ligatus), green sweat bees (Agapostemon sp.), 
Hunt’s bumblebees (Bombus huntii), and mason bees 
(Osmia sp.), and Micranthophora flexipes as well as 
European honey bees (Apis mellifera). Managing seed 
production fields for native bee habitat may improve seed 
yield.  
 

 

 

Figure 2. A green sweat bee (Agapostemon sp.) visiting Douglas' 
dustymaiden. Photo by Derek Tilley 

 

It is difficult to remove the membranous pappus from the 
achene for seed processing, and complete removal may 
not be possible (figures 2 and 3). This may become 
problematic when attempting to seed through a grain or 
range drill or other seeding equipment, especially without 
the aid of a dilutant such as rice hulls. Good results in 
removing the pappus can be obtained from hammer-
milling the seed with a sizeable amount of plant material. 
The inert matter helps in rubbing the pappus from the 
achenes. Using the hammer-mill or debearder without 
inert material does not provide enough weight or friction 
for successful achene removal. Some damage occurs to 
seed during milling, but germination rates of milled seed 
do not appear to differ significantly from un-milled seed 
(Tilley and St. John, 2010).  
 
An alternate method used by USDA Forest Service at the 
Bend, OR Seed Extractory is to use a Westrup Model LA-
H laboratory brush machine with a #40 mantel at a speed 
of 3 to dislodge seed from the flower heads and remove 
the pappus. The gate is left completely open to allow the 
seed to move quickly through the machine and avoid 
damaging the achenes. This is followed by air-screening 
(Barner 2009). 
 

 
Figure 3. Unprocessed Douglas' dustymaiden seed. Photo by Derek 
Tilley. 

 

Figure 4. Seed after processing. Photo by Derek Tilley. 

 

 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
Currently there are no releases of this species.  
 
Aberdeen Plant Materials Center assembled collections of 
Douglas’ dustymaiden in 2007 and began evaluating 
populations in a common garden study in 2008. The goal 
is to develop one or more selected class germplasm 
releases for use in the Intermountain West. 
 
References 
Barner, J. 2009. Propagation protocol for production of 
Chaenactis douglasii (Hook.) Hook. & Arn. Seeds; 
USDA FS-R6 Bend Seed Extractory, Bend, OR. In: 
Native Plant Network. URL: http://www.nativeplant 
network.org (accessed 26 July 2010). Moscow (ID): 
University of Idaho, College of Natural Resources, 
Forest Research Nursery. 

Borden, R.K. and R. Black. 2005. Volunteer revegetation 
of waste rock surfaces at the Bingham Canyon Mine, 
Utah. Journal of Environmental Quality 34:2234-
2242. 

Coffey, T. 1993. The History and Folklore of North 
American Wildflowers. Houghton Mifflin Co. 
Boston, MA. 

Foster. S., and C. Hobbs. 2002.  A Field Guide to Western 

Medicinal Plants and Herbs. Houghton Mifflin 
Harcourt. 442p.  

Morefield. J.D. Mooring, J.S. 1980.  2006.  Chaenactis.  

In: Flora of North America Editorial Committee, 
Eds.  1993+.  Flora of North America North of 
Mexico.  12+  vols.  New York and Oxford.  Vol. 21, 
pp. 400-414. 

Mooring, J.S. 1980. A Cytogeographic Study of 

Chaenactis douglasii. American journal of Botany 67 
(9) pp. 1304-1319.  

Parkinson, H., and A. DeBolt. 2005. Propagation protocol 

for production of container Chaenactis douglasii 
(Hook.) H. & A. plants; USDA Forest Service, 
RMRS, Boise, ID. In: Native Plant Network. URL: 
http://www.nativeplantnetwork.org (accessed 9 Feb 

 

2007). Moscow (ID): University of Idaho, College of 
Natural Resources, Forest Research Nursery. 

Tilley, D. and L. St. John. 2010. Douglas’ dustymaiden 

initial evaluation planting: progress report 2010. 
USDA-NRCS. Aberdeen, ID. 

USDA-NRCS. 2009. The PLANTS Database [Online]. 

Available at http://plants.usda.gov (accessed 10 
December 2009). USDA-NPDC, Baton Rouge, LA. 

Welsh, S.L., N.D. Atwood, S. Goodrich, and L.C. 

Higgins. 2003. A Utah Flora. Third Edition, revised. 
Brigham Young University, Provo, UT. 

 
Prepared By 
Derek Tilley; Range Scientist, USDA NRCS Plant 
Materials Center, Aberdeen, Idaho. 
 
Dan Ogle; Plant Materials Specialist, USDA NRCS, 
Boise, Idaho. 
 
Loren St. John; Team Leader, USDA NRCS Plant 
Materials Center, Aberdeen, Idaho. 
 
Citation 
Tilley, D., D. Ogle, and L. St. John. 2010. Plant guide for 
Doulas’ dusty maiden (Chaenactis douglasii). USDA-
Natural Resources Conservation Service, Idaho Plant 
Materials Center. Aberdeen, ID. 83210. 
 
Published: November 2010 
 
Edited: 10Sep2010djt; 10Sep2010LS; 10Sep2010jab; 
21Sept2010dgo 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

