 
 

 

Plant Guide

40% protein and has a moderately-low glucosinolate 
content.    
Camelina seems to perform well as a companion crop 
(instead of oats) in establishing legumes for green 
manure cover and/or forage (Hunter 2010). 

Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Weediness 
It is considered a weed in many areas, but other areas 
embrace it for the use of its oils as a food, fuel or for 
its possible medicinal value.  Camelina is primarily a 
minor weed in flax and not often a problem in other 
crops (Putnam et al., 1993).  Its ability to survive in a 
diverse range of habitats enables it to be introduced 
fairly easily into new environments (Global Invasive 
Species Database).   
 
Please consult with your local NRCS Field Office, 
Cooperative Extension Service office, state natural 
resource, or state agriculture department regarding its 
status and use.  Weed information is also available 
from the PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/.  
Please consult the Related Web Sites on the Plant 
Profile for this species for further information. 

Description 
Camelina sativa is an annual in the mustard family 
and attains heights of 1 to 3 feet.  It has branched 
stems that become woody at maturity.  Stems are 
generally smooth or only sparsely hairy near their 
base (Hitchcock and Cronquist 1973). Leaves are 
arrow-shaped, sharp-pointed, 2 to 3.5 inches long 
with smooth edges.  It produces prolific small, pale 
yellow or greenish-yellow flowers with 4 petals.  
Fruits are pear shaped pods known as silicles and 
have a squared off tip (Klinkenberg 2008).  Seed 
pods are ¼ to slightly more than ½ inch long.  Seeds 
are small (< 1/16 inch long and about half as wide) 
pale yellow-brown, oblong, rough, with a ridged 
surface.  There are approximately 400,000 seeds of 
camelina per pound. 
 
Camelina is widely distributed throughout the 
northern tier of states within the United States. 
For current distribution, please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 

CAMELINA 

Camelina sativa (L.) Crantz 

Plant Symbol = CASA2 

Contributed by:  USDA NRCS WA Plant Materials 
Program

 

1, Camelina sativa, Photo by Robert Evans, ARS 

Alternate Names 
False flax,Gold-of-pleasure,Linseed dodder 
Largeseed Falseflax,Leindotter, Siberian oilseed 
 

Uses 
For a long time camelina was known primarily in 
North America as a weed.  More recently, camelina is 
being recognized for its value as an oilseed crop.  Oil 
content of the seed, on a dry weight basis, is typically 
between 30 and 40 percent.  The oil contains about 
64 percent polyunsaturated, 30 percent 
monounsaturated, and 6 percent saturated fatty acids 
(McVay and Lamb 2008).  Camelina oil can be used 
in both edible and industrial products.  Historically, 
the seeds of camelina were crushed and boiled to 
release oil for food, medicinal use, and lamp oil.  
More recently camelina is being grown as a source of 
vegetable oil high in omega-3 fatty acids.  Camelina 
is being marketed in Europe in salad dressing and as 
cooking oil (it is not suitable as deep-fat fry oil). It is 
also used in cosmetics, skin care products, soaps, and 
soft detergents (Ehrensing and Guy 2008).  The oil 
has been used successfully as an adjuvant in 
agricultural spraying applications, as a biodiesel, and 
it has been approved for use in cattle, chicken, and 
pig feed (Ehrensing and Guy 2008, Hulbert et al 
2011). 
Camelina meal, the product remaining after the oil 
has been extracted from the seed, is similar to 
soybean and canola meal and contains more than 

 

 

Adaptation 
Camelina is native to parts of Asia and Europe, but it 
is widely naturalized elsewhere (USDA-ARS, 2008).  
Camelina has been introduced into the lower 48 
states of continental United States (USA) as well as 
Alaska and Canada (USDA-NRCS, 2008). 
 
Camelina is a short-season crop (85 to 100 days) that 
is well adapted to production in the temperate climate 
zone. It is generally grown as an early summer 
annual oilseed crop but can be grown as a winter 
annual in milder climates (Hunter 2010).  It is likely 
best adapted to cooler climates where excessive heat 
during flowering is not important.  Camelina 
germinates at low temperature, and seedlings are very 
frost tolerant.  In Montana, no seedling damage has 
been seen at temperatures as low as 12oF (Ehrensing 
and Guy 2008).  Camelina is often grown on 
marginal land.  It responds well under drought stress 
conditions and may be better suited to low rainfall 
regions than most other oilseed crops.   In initial trials 
in Pennsylvania it has not performed well on wet and 
poorly drained soils (Hunter 2010).  
 

2, Camelina sativa, USDA Plants Database 

Establishment 
A crucial first step in camelina production is field 
selection.  Few herbicides have been approved for 
use in camelina so it is critical to select fields where 
prior management has limited weed pressure and 

 

 

weed seed production was kept to a minimum.  
Perennial weeds such as field bindweed, Canada 
thistle, and skeletonweed are especially problematic 
for camelina.  Being rhizomatous, or tap rooted, long 
lived and broadleaves, few if any management 
practices exist to control these perennials in camelina 
fields.   
It is also important to know the field’s chemical 
history.  Camelina is highly sensitive to the soil 
herbicide imidazolinones (e.g. Beyond® and Pursuit®) 
(Hulbert et al, 2011).   The active ingredient 
sulfentrazone (Authority®/Spartan®) is also extremely 
active on camelina (Hunter 2010).  Research on 
camelina’s susceptibility to herbicide carryover has 
not been completed so other soil applied chemicals 
may result in damage to the camelina crop.  Until 
further research is done, to determine specific plant 
back restriction for camelina, following plant back 
restrictions for canola or rapeseed on herbicide labels 
will minimize risk to the camelina crop.  Depending 
on specific herbicides, these restrictions may be as 
long as 4 years.  A field bioassay is recommended if 
questions remain about residual herbicides.  
 
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
pest control method.  Trade names and control 
measures appear in this document only to provide 
specific information.  USDA NRCS does not 
guarantee or warranty the products and control 
methods named, and other products may be equally 
effective.  
 
Camelina should be seeded in late winter or very 
early spring at a rate of 3-5 lbs pure live seed/acre.  
Camelina has no seed dormancy.  Planting dates in 
Oregon, for example, can be as early as late February 
(Wysocki and Sirovatka 2008).  Germination occurs 
after soil temperatures reach 38oF.  Late spring 
plantings have shown decreased yields (McVay and 
Lamb 2008, Ehrensing and Guy 2008).   
Seed should be planted 1/4 inch deep, or less, into 
firm soil.  Shallow placement is vital when seeding 
camelina.  No-till and fully prepared seedbeds will 
allow better control of seed placement than will 
reduced tillage fields.  Current recommendations are 
to drill camelina seed utilizing packer wheels to 
ensure good seed to soil contact.  Because camelina 
seed is small and the seeding rate low grain drills 
may not be capable of metering the seed at the proper 
rate.  Mix rice hulls, or other filler, in with the seed to 
achieve proper seeding rate. If broadcast seeding is 
used, the operation should be followed with a roller 
harrow or other implement to mix the seed and soil 
together and press the seed into the soil (McVay and 
Lamb 2008).   Broadcast seeding rates should be 1.5 
to 2 times the drilled rate.  
 
Soil testing, to determine fertilizer needs, is 
recommended.  Like other crops in the mustard 
family, camelina responds to nitrogen, sulfur, and 

phosphorus fertilizer application. Camelina is a short-
season crop that requires a modest amount of 
nitrogen.  Approximately 5 lbs N/acre for each 100 lb 
of expected seed yield is the recommended rate.  For 
sulfur Wysocki and Sirovatka 2008 suggest applying 
sulfur at 5-10 lb/acre if the field tests low for sulfur 
or if response to sulfur has been observed with spring 
cereals.  Phosphorus application of up to 60 lb/acre 
has been shown to increase the yield of camelina 
(Ehrensing and Gay 2008).   

 
Management 
Currently, camelina production is recommended in 
conjunction with a small grain rotation.  It grows well 
following wheat, barley, peas, or lentils.  Avoid fields 
following canola, mustard, or other Brassica crops 
(Grady and Nleya 2010).   Planting camelina after 
similar crops, such as canola, mustard, etc., increases 
the risk insect and disease problems common to these 
species.  Also, because all seeds are not collected 
during harvest volunteer plants can become a 
problem (Steven Guy 2011, personal com.). 
Choosing fields with low weed pressure, good 
chemical or mechanical fallow techniques in 
association with uniform, dense camelina stand 
establishment are the best defenses against weed 
growth. Camelina requires few agriculture inputs 
when compared with other crops. 
 

 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Downy mildew has been observed on camelina in 
fields in the Pacific Northwest and Montana.  Downy 
mildew is a seed-borne fungal disease.  Seed from 
down mildew infested fields should not be saved for 
planting in subsequent years. Camelina is susceptible 
to sclerotinia stem rot but reports of major outbreaks 
are uncommon.  Infection weakens the plant stem, 
causing losses from lodging and early ripening.  This 
disease infects many other crops, including 
sunflower, potatoes, safflower, beans, peas, and 
alfalfa, and is usually managed by crop rotation.  
Camelina may also be susceptible to the Rhizoctonia 
fungus.  Camelina is highly resistant to blackleg a 
major disease of canola and other Brassica crops 
(Ehrensing and Guy 2008).  To avoid potential 
disease problems, camelina should be rotated with 
cereal crops and should not be grown following crops 
like canola or mustard. Grow camelina no more than 
once every four years on any one field.   

 
Environmental Concerns 
Erosion - Camelina does not produce high amounts 
of residue.  Low residue levels could lead to an 
increase in soil erosion.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) or 

Extension office for information on sustainable crop 
production in your area.   
 
Allelopathic - Camelina may have an allelopathic 
suppression effect on flax.  Flax yields were more 
than proportionately lower in fields containing 
camelina than in fields without, i.e. flax biomass was 
reduced more than could be accounted for by the 
increase in camelina biomass within the field.  
(Grummer and Beyer 1960). 
   
Weeds - Preliminary evidence suggests that escaped 
C. sativa populations are likely to be relegated to 
severely disturbed habitats.  The current probability 
that this species will invade rangelands to cause 
ecological damage is low (Davis, et al 2011).      

Control 
Volunteer camelina is easily controlled with typical 
fall chemical fallow operations.  Seedlings that 
survive the winter can be readily controlled by 
chemical fallow operations in subsequent years or by 
broadleaf herbicides utilized in cereal production 
practice (McVay and Lamb 2008). 
Please contact your local agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method.   

Seeds and Plant Production 
Camelina grows rapidly and, in Montana field trials, 
completed its lifecycle a few weeks sooner than 
spring wheat.  Good yields have been achieved 
following cereal crops on fields which would 
otherwise have been fallow.  
In Montana harvest dates vary from late June to late 
July depending on seeding date, precipitation, 
temperature and harvest method.  Harvest should 
proceed only when seeds are 10 percent moisture or 
less using a canola standard in a moisture meter 
(Hunter 2010).  Camelina is usually direct-combined 
but can be swathed.  Start swathing when about two-
thirds of the pods turn from green to yellow.  When 
swathing camelina, the crop should be cut just below 
the pod canopy to retain as much standing stem as 
possible.  Combine settings similar to those used for 
canola or alfalfa seed work well for camelina, but 
combine fan speed must be reduced to minimized 
seed losses (Hulbert et.al 2011).  Since camelina 
seeds are quite small, leaks in equipment need to be 
sealed to prevent seed loss during harvest.  There is 
no known seed dormancy in camelina and seed lost 
during harvest generally germinates soon thereafter.  
Camelina seed is susceptible to spoiling under high-
moisture conditions.  Seed moisture should be no 
more than 8% for best storage (Grady and Nleya 
2010).  
 

 

 

Climate has a big impact on camelina yields.  In 
southwestern South Dakota the hot dry conditions 
that occur during flowering and seed shatter reduce 
yields significantly.  In plot trials the average yield 
over a 4 year period was approximately 350 lbs/acre.  
In contrast, in cooler conditions, yields of over 2,000 
lbs/acre have been obtained in plot trials at Minot, 
N.D., and Havre, Montana (Grady and Nleya 2010).   
In Montana, under dryland conditions, camelina is 
expected to yield 1,800 to 2,000 lb/acre in areas 
receiving 16-18 inches of annual  precipitation (ppt.), 
and 900 to 1,700 lb/acre in areas receiving 13-15 
inches of ppt. (Ehrensing and Guy 2008).  
 
In the Pacific Northwest camelina yields are greatly 
influenced by precipitation in the dryland region.  
Higher precipitation sites such as Pullman, 
Washington and Moscow, Idaho (18-25 inches ppt.) 
produce consistently high yields (2,000+ lb/acre), 
while camelina yields at Lind (9¼ annual ppt.) have 
ranged from 100 lbs/acre during an extreme drought 
year to as high as 1000 lbs/acre during a year with 11 
½ inches of precipitation (Hulbert et al, 2011).  

Cultivars 
 ‘Blaine Creek’, developed at Montana State 
University, 2007,  is a short-season, high-yield line 
particularly adapted to high-yield environments.  
‘Blaine Creek’ is also high in omega-3 fatty acids.  
 
‘Suneson’ , also developed at Montana State 
University, 2007, is a mid-season, average-yield line.  
‘Suneson’ is typically 2 to 3 percent higher in oil 
content than ‘Blaine Creek’.  ‘Suneson’ is high in α-
linolenic acid.  
 
‘Platte’, from Blue Sun Biodiesel, which replaced 
‘Cheyenne’ in 2009 is a spring variety selected for 
yield stability in a dryland environment (< 20” annual 
precipitation). 
 
‘SO-40’, ‘SO-50’, SO-60’, developed in 2010 by the 
Sustainable Oils Company are spring-type camelina 
varieties with high yield potential across a broad 
range of environmental conditions.  They mature in 
about 100 days and have an oil content of about 
37.5%.  In field trials, oil yields ranged from 651 
lbs/acre (‘SO-60’) to 684 (‘SO-50’) lbs/acre.  
 
Varieties from Europe include ‘Celine’, ‘Calena’, 
and ‘Epona’.  Great Plains – The Camelina Company 
has developed several new varieties as well.  Other 
varieties are available and as work continues on 
camelina more varieties will, undoubtedly, become 
available in the near future.  Please contact 
companies for more information on available 
varieties.  
 
 
 

 

 

Global Invasive Species Database 
(http://www.issg.org/database) 

Grady, Kathleen, and Thandiwe Nleya. 2010. 
Camelina Production. South Dakota State 
University, Extension Extra, ExEx8167, May 
2010.  

Grummer, G and H Beyer. 1960.  The influence 
exerted by species of Camelina on Flax by 
means of toxic substances. The Biology of 
Weeds, 153-157, Oxford.  

References 
Britton, N.L., and A. Brown. 1913.  An illustrated 
flora of the northern United States, Canada and 
the British Possessions. 3 vols.  Charles 
Scribner’s Sons, New York. Vol 2: 157.  

Davis, Philip B., Fabian D. Menalled, Robert K. D. 

Peterson, and Bruce D. Maxwell 2011. 
Refinement of weed risk assessments for 
Biofuels using camelina sative as a model 
species.  Journal of Applied Ecology, 48, 989-
997. 

Dennis, La Rea J., 1980.  Gilkey’s Weeds of the 
Pacific Northwest. Oregon State University 
Press.  

Ehrensing, Daryl T. and Stephen O. Guy. 2008. 

Camelina.  Oregon State University Extension 
Service, EM 8953-E, January 2008.  

Hitchcock C. Leo and Arthur Cronquist 1973. Flora 
of the Pacific Northwest, An Illustrated Manual.  
University of Washington Press. Seattle and 
London 

Hulbert, Scot, Stephen Guy, Bill Pan, Timothy 
Paulitz, Bill Schillinger, Don Wysocki, and 
Karen Sowers. 2011.  Camelina Production in 
the Dryland Pacific Northwest. Washington State 
University, Fact Sheet (in review).  

Hunter, Joel and Greg Roth 2010.  Camelina 

Production and Potential in Pennsylvania, 
Agronomy Facts 72. College of Agricultural 
Sciences, Crop and Soil Sciences, Pennsylvania 
State University. 

Jackson, G., and J. Miller 2005.  Effect of nitrogen, 
phosphorus and sulfur on yield, oil content, and 
oil quality of camelina.  
http;//ag.montana.edu/wtarc/Web2005/Soils/Ca
melina/2005CamelinaNPS.pdf 

King, S.R., 2008. Weed Science Society of America 
(WSSA).  WSSA Meeting Abstract:  Montana 
State University, Huntley MT camelina sativa 
Tolerance to Preemergence and Postemergence 
Herbicide Applications.   

Klindenberg, Brian. 2008.  E-Flora BC:  Electronic 
Atlas of the Plants of British Columbia.  Lab for 
Advanced Spatial Analysis, Department of 
Georgraphy, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver.  

McVay, K.A. and P.F. Lamb. 2008. Camelina 

Production in Montana. Montana State 

Fleenor, Richard A. 2011. Plant Guide for Camelina 
(Camelina sativa). USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Spokane, WA 99201 
 
Published September, 2011 
Edited: 20Sep2011 rf,30Sep2011 jab 

For more information about this and other plants, 
please contact your local NRCS field office or 
Conservation District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ 
and visit the PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant Materials Program 
Web site http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or 
availability of other Web sites. 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

University Extension, MontGuide, MT200701AG 

Revised 3/08.  

Putnam, D.H., J. T. Budin, L.A. Field, and W.M. 

Breene. 1993 Camelina: A promising low-input 
oilseed.  In J. Janick and J.E. Simon (Eds.), New 
crops (pp. 314-322). New York: Wiley.  

Sustainable Oils web site. 2009. 

(http://www.susoils.com/opportunities/protocol_
spring.php) 

Wysocki, Don and Nick Sirovatka. 2008.  Camelina, 
a Potential Oilseed Crop for Semiarid Oregon.  

 
Prepared By: 
Richard Fleenor, USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Program, Spokane WA   

Citation 

 

