 
 

 

Plant Guide

Status  
Christ’s Indian paintbrush is currently a Candidate for 
listing under the Endangered Species Act and is on the US 
Fish and Wildlife Service Notice of Review list.  It is also 
a Sensitive plant species on the Regional Foresters 
Sensitive List for the Intermountain Region of the USDA 
Forest Service.    
  
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State Department 
of Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g. 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).  
  
Description  
General: Perennial herb, 5 to 15 inches tall; stems erect to 
ascending, usually unbranched, several to a cluster; 
herbage glabrous to hispid with some hairs gland-tipped 
near the inflorescence.  The leaves are 2-5 inches long, 
narrowly to broadly lanceolate, with 1 or maybe 2 pairs of 
lateral lobes, although sometimes all entire.  The 
inflorescence is glandular, yellow to yellow orange, the 
bracts lanceolate to ovate, with 1 or 2 pairs of narrow 
lateral lobes; the calyx is 0.5 to 1 inch long, the primary 
lobes more deeply cleft in front than behind; the corolla is 
approximately 1 to 1.5 inches long, the galea about 0.5 
inch and the lower lip much reduced with incurved teeth, 
the tube 0.5 to 0.75 inch long (Mosley 1993).  This and 
other paintbrush species are often believed to be purely 
parasitic, meaning that they survive by using resources 
produced in another plant host.  However, Christ’s Indian 
paintbrush is actually hemi-parasitic in that it is capable 
of independent production of nutrients but gains 
additional nutrients through root attachment with 
surrounding plants (Center for Plant Conservation 2006).  
  
Distribution: Known from one population on Mount 
Harrison, Cassia County, Idaho.  For current distribution, 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Habitat: Christ’s Indian paintbrush is found in grassy 
upper sub-alpine meadows along the crest and slope of 
Mount Harrison in loamy gravel and occurs most often in 
areas where snowdrifts remain into early summer.  It is 
found among stands of Sandberg bluegrass (Poa 
secunda), Idaho fescue (Festuca idahoensis), alpine 
goldenrod (Solidago multiraciata), western yarrow 
(Achillea millefolium) and coiled-beak lousewort 
(Pedicularis contorta) (Center for Plant Conservation 
2006).  
  
Adaptation  
Christ’s Indian paintbrush occurs almost exclusively on 
gentle, northerly facing slopes (9,100 feet elevation) of 

CHRIST’S INDIAN 

PAINTBRUSH 

Castilleja christii N.H. Holmgren 

Plant Symbol = CACH19 

 
Contributed by: USDA, NRCS Idaho Plant Materials 
Program  

 

Figure 1 Carol Dawson, Center of Plant Conservation 
 
Alternate Names  
None known.  
  
Uses  
Christ’s Indian paintbrush is one of Idaho’s rarest plants.  
A single population occurs in the Albion Mountains of 
Cassia County, Idaho.  It was named after John H. Christ, 
the first botanist to collect the species (Center for Plant 
Conservation 2006).  This species has no known 
agricultural, economic, or other human uses at this time.  
This species may have scientific significance due to its 
evolutionary isolation which is an important subject in 
conservation biology research.  

 

Mount Harrison, Cassia County, Idaho.  It only rarely 
occurs in deep soils on south and west facing slopes.  The 
soils are deep and gravelly appearing to have been 
derived from the underlying quartzite bedrock (Mosley 
1993).  
  
Establishment  
Christ’s Indian paintbrush reproduces by seed.  Little is 
known about seed dispersal or viability and no pollinators 
have been observed.  Growth begins slightly before or 
soon after the snow melts in late June to early July.  Peak 
flowering occurs from mid-July to mid-August depending 
on the year.  Fruits begin to mature soon after flowering 
and probably dehisce by mid-September (Mosley 1993).  
Seeds have been collected by Denver Botanic Gardens 
and are currently stored at the National Seed Storage 
Laboratory in Fort Collins, Colorado.  Seed germination 
studies by Denver Botanic Gardens suggest that this 
species has strong seed dormancy since they may require 
three months or more of cool, moist conditions to 
germinate.  This dormancy mechanism is likely due to the 
habitat where the plant is found (Center for Plant 
Conservation 2006).  
  
Management  
A Candidate Conservation Agreement outlining 10 years 
of conservation actions for this rare species was signed by 
the US Fish and Wildlife Service and USDA Forest 
Service in 2005 (USDA-FS 2009).    
  
Pests and Potential Problems  
Considerable pocket gopher digging takes place on sites 
occupied by Christ’s Indian paintbrush.  The species is 
threatened primarily by smooth brome (Bromus inermus), 
an aggressive introduced grass that is found within the 
population.  
  
Environmental Concerns  
The greatest threats to this species is habitat loss and 
degradation, due mainly to road construction and 
recreational activities.  Although the site where the 
population occurs is closed to livestock grazing, trespass 
occasionally occurs (Center for Plant Conservation 2006).  
The long term effect of global climate change on this 
population may require extraordinary conservation 
measures such as ex situ conservation of the plant and its 
seeds to ensure its continued existence (USDA-FS 2009) 
 
 
 

 

 

 

2009).  

christii (Christ’s Indian paintbrush). [Online]. 

September 2009).  

Indian Paintbrush (Castilleja christii) and 

[Online]. Available at 
http:www.centerforplantconservation.org/ASP/CPC_

Figure 2 Carol Dawson, Center for Plant Conservation 
 
Seeds and Plant Production  
No commercial or restoration propagation known.  
  
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
None.  
  
References  
Center for Plant Conservation 2006. Castilleja christii. 
 
 
  ViewProfile.asp?CPCNum=804/ (accessed 11 
 
Moseley 1993. The Status and distribution of Christ’s 
 
  Davis’Wavewing (Cymopterus davisii) in the Albion 
  Mountains, Sawtooth National Forest and City of 
  Rocks National Reserve. Idaho Department of Fish 
 
USDA Forest Service 2009. Plant of the Week. Christ’s 
 
 
  week/castilleja_christii.shtml/ (accessed 11 September 
 
USDA PLANTS Database. PLANTS Profile for Castilleja 
 
  Available at 
 
 
 
 

http://plants.usda.gov/java/nameSearch?keywordquery
=Castilleja+christii&mode=sciname/ (accessed 30 
September 2009) 

and Game. 17 p.  

Indian Paintbrush. [Online]. Available at  
http://www.fs.fed.us/wildflowers/plant-of-the-

 
Prepared By  
Loren St. John, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho  
  
Dan Ogle, USDA NRCS Idaho State Office, Boise, Idaho  
  
Citation  
St. John, L. and D.G. Ogle. Plant Guide for Christ’s 
Indian paintbrush (Castilleja christii). USDA Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, ID.  

Published December, 2010 

Edited: 02Nov09ls; 05Nov09dgo; 19 Nov09 
jb;19Nov09mws; 24Nov09ls  

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

