 
 

 

Plant Guide

Status   
Rush skeletonweed is a non-native, invasive terrestrial 
forb listed as noxious, prohibited, or banned in nine 
western states.  
 
Weediness 
This plant may be weedy or invasive in some regions or 
habitats and may displace desirable vegetation if not 
properly managed.  Consult with your local NRCS Field 
Office, Cooperative Extension Service office, state natural 
resource, or state agriculture department regarding its 
status and use.  Additional weed information is available 
from the PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov.  Consult 
other related web sites on the Plant Profile for this species 
for further information. 
 
Description 
Rush skeletonweed forms a rosette of prostrate, glabrous 
leaves 1.6 to 24.7 inches (4-12 centimeters) long, 0.6 to 
1.8 inches (1.5 to 4.5 centimeters) wide, and oblanceolate 
in shape.  The leaf margins are deeply and irregularly 
toothed with lobes pointing backward toward the leaf base 
(runcinate) similar to the rosette leaves of dandelion 
(Taraxacum spp).  The leaf base narrows to a short, 
winged petiole.  Normally, one flowering stem grows per 
rosette.  Flowering stems reach heights of 1.6 to 3.3 feet 
(50-100 centimeters) and have numerous spreading or 
ascending branches.  They are glabrous except for short, 
rigid, downward-pointing hairs near the base, similar to 
prickly lettuce (Lactuca sirriola).  Generally, the stems 
are leafless, they may have long-linear, bract-like leaves, 
or they may have leaves similar to the rosette leaves but 
smaller and only on the lower part of the stem.  The 
rosette leaves die at flowering leaving a skeleton-like 
stem. 
 
The flowerheads (capitula) are solitary or in groups of 
two to five in the stem branch axils, along the branches, 
and at the branch ends.  The cylindrical involucre has two 
rows of bracts; the outer row is very short and crown-like, 
the inner row has seven to nine linear-lanceolate bracts 
with either no hairs, sparsely tomentose, or sometimes a 
row of rigid hairs on the median line.  Each capitulum 
bears nine to 12 bright yellow, ligulate florets.  The florets 
produce achenes (small fruits) three to four millimeters 
long and with numerous ribs.  At the tip of the achene is a 
beak five to six millimeters long that bears a pappus of 
numerous soft bristles.  The pappus facilitates wind 
dispersal. 
 
The taproot of rush skeletonweed is small in diameter but 
penetrates deeply into the soil.  Lateral roots are produced 
along its entire length.  Rosettes can grow from 
adventitious buds at the top of the tap root and along 

RUSH SKELETONWEED 

 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Montana State Office 
 

Chondrilla  juncea L. 

Plant Symbol = CHJU 

. 

Rush skeletonweed rosette and flowering stem.  Photo by Tim 
Prather, University of Idaho 
 
Caution: This plant may be weedy or invasive
 
Alternate Names 
skeletonweed, naked weed, gum succory. 
 
Uses   
Rush skeletonweed is palatable and nutritious in the 
rosette and early bolting stages and makes good sheep and 
goat fodder.   
 
Honey bees use it for pollen and honey. 
 

 

major lateral roots.  The roots are brittle and easily break 
during cultivation or other soil disturbance.  Thick white 
latex exudes from the leaves, stems and roots when they 
are broken or cut. 
 
Distribution 
For current distribution, consult the Plant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Habitat 
Rush skeletonweed originated from the Transcaspian 
region of Eurasia, its native range extending from 
Western Europe and northern Africa to central Asia.  It 
has become widespread in wheat growing regions and 
rangelands of Idaho, Oregon, and Washington.  It is 
considered an early seral species invading disturbed areas 
in crop, pasture, range and forest lands.  It may also 
invade intact plant communities in low rainfall areas such 
as southwestern Idaho.  Optimum climatic conditions for 
rush skeletonweed are cool winters and warm summers 
without severe drought and with winter and spring 
precipitation typical of semi-arid and Mediterranean 
climates.  It has been found in areas with annual 
precipitation ranging from 9 to 59 inches (23 to 150 
centimeters) and elevation ranging from sea level to 6,000 
feet.  Summer temperatures of at least 59 degrees 
Fahrenheit (15 degrees Celsius) are needed for flower and 
seed production.  Rush skeletonweed has no absolute 
requirement for vernalization although it accelerates 
flowering.  It is found on a wide range of soil types but is 
most abundant on sandy, sandy-loam, and silt loam soils.  
It is a weed of cultivated sites, open areas and 
disturbances.  Areas affected by wildfire and pastures 
weakened by drought, overgrazing, or with cheatgrass or 
medusahead invasion are susceptible to rush 
skeletonweed invasion. 
 
Life History 
In its native Eurasian range, rush skeletonweed is 
described as a biennial.  In its invaded ranges in Australia 
and North and South America it is described as a 
perennial living up to 20 years.  There are also variations 
in its form.  The root system is long lived and rich in 
carbohydrate reserves.  Adventitious buds on the roots 
enable it to grow year after year.  New plants can arise 
from intact roots or root fragments and local population 
expansion is mainly by vegetative regeneration.  One to 
several rosettes grows from adventitious root buds of the 
parent plant usually in autumn (September into 
November).  Plants overwinter as rosettes and begin 
growth again in the spring (March and April).  Rosettes 
can begin growth in summer if moisture follows drought 
and rosettes that initiate growth in summer usually flower 
immediately.  Flowering stems elongate from the central 
growing points of rosettes in April and May.  As the 
flowering stems grow the rosette leaves die leaving nearly 
leafless plants during the summer.  Flower buds form in 
June and July, and plants bloom in July.  The capitula 
open early in the morning and close before sunset.  In hot 

 

 

dry conditions, the capitula will only remain open for a 
couple of hours.  Seeds form without pollination 
(apomixis).  Seeds are fully developed about two weeks 
after flowering and a small number of seeds have been 
observed to germinate three days after flowering.  Seed 
production peaks in July and August but can continue into 
November.  Seed production per plant under field 
conditions can be as high as 10,000, and seed production 
from dense populations were estimated to be 70,000 per 
square meter.  Flowering stems usually die in October at 
about the time new rosettes begin to appear; however the 
timing is variable depending on moisture conditions. 
 

 

Rush skeletonweed flower.  Photo by Tim Prather, University of 
Idaho. 
 
Rush skeletonweed seed is not long-lived in the seedbank 
because they have little to no dormancy and they only 
remain viable in the soil for 6 to 18 months.  However, an 
Idaho study found that 60% of seed stored for one year 
maintained good viability.  The seed has high viability (up 
to 80%).  Burial of seed deeper than 25 millimeters in the 
soil prevents germination.  Seedlings may emerge at any 
time moisture is available and temperatures are above 45 
degrees Fahrenheit (7 degrees Celsius), but most 
germination occurs in the fall.  As little as 5 millimeters 
of rain will stimulate germination.  Seedlings require a 
continuous supply of moisture for three to six weeks to 
survive desiccation.  Above-ground growth of seedlings is 
slow in the fall, but seedling roots grow rapidly.  Plants 
overwinter as rosettes.  Rosettes developed from autumn-
emerged seedlings usually produce a flowering stem the 
spring following emergence. 
 
Establishment 
Rush skeletonweed establishes from seed and adventitious 
buds on roots. 
 
Management 
See Control. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
See Environmental Concerns. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
In Australia, rush skeletonweed is considered the most 
serious weed in wheat growing regions where it reduces 

yields and the wiry flowering stems, or their latex, clog 
harvesting equipment which increases breakdown and 
maintenance costs.  Infestations reduce grazing forage 
potential, the stems interfere with livestock grazing, and 
there have been reports of the stems causing choking 
when eaten by cattle.  Dense infestations reduce native 
plant diversity. 
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Not applicable. 
 
Control 
Contact your local agricultural extension specialist or 
county weed specialist to learn what works best for 
control in your area and how to use it safely.  Always read 
label and safety instructions for each control method.  
Trade names and control measures appear in this 
document only to provide specific information.  USDA 
NRCS does not guarantee or warranty the products and 
control methods named, and other products may be 
equally effective. 
 
Rush skeletonweed’s ability to regenerate from roots deep 
in the soil profile along with poor translocation of 
herbicide to the extensive root system makes this weed 
difficult to control with herbicides.  Successful control of 
this plant using herbicides usually requires multiple 
reapplications.  The poor soil conditions favored by the 
plant (e.g., dry, coarse, and low in organic matter) also 
reduce herbicide persistence in the soil.  Additionally, the 
morphology of rush skeletonweed, specifically the lack of 
leaf area, reduces herbicide translocation as a result of 
inadequate retention and adsorption.  Translocation can be 
improved with silicone surfactants and water conditioning 
agents.  Picloram (one quart product per acre) or picloram 
combined with 2,4-D (one quart plus one quart per acre) 
applied to autumn rosettes are the herbicide treatments 
that give the best root killing results.  A single application 
is not likely to kill all root buds and applications in 
subsequent years will be necessary.  Clopyralid, 
aminopyralid, and dicamba also translocate into the roots. 
Hand pulling and digging can provide control of small 
populations if plants are pulled several times each year for 
many years.  Hand pulling will stimulate adventitious 
growth from root buds for the first few years until root 
reserves are depleted.  Six to 10 years of mechanical 
control will be needed to eliminate populations. 
 
Mowing is not an effective control for rush skeletonweed.  
Rosettes are flat to the ground and missed by the mower 
blade.  Mowing when plants bolt to flower may 
temporarily reduce seed production but plants will survive 
to flower again. 
 
Root fragments of rush skeletonweed are spread by tillage 
which may increase infestation size.  Tillage every six to 
eight weeks may effectively eliminate the weed.  In many 
locations in Idaho, Montana, Oregon, and Washington, 

 

 

rush skeletonweed does not occupy sites where tillage is 
practical. 
 
Irrigation is not recommended as a control by itself 
because it stimulates seedling and rosette emergence.  
Where rush skeletonweed invades irrigated pasture and 
hayland, carefully planned irrigation management will 
stimulate the competitiveness of the forage crop and when 
combined with nutrient, forage harvest, and grazing 
management practices will help prevent the re-
establishment of rush skeletonweed after other control 
practices are applied. 
 
Rush skeletonweed produces larger and leafier rosettes, 
but not more rosettes, when nitrogen fertilizer is applied.  
One study found application of superphosphate (about 
125 pounds per acre) reduced rosette densities by an 
average of 80%, probably due to increased competition 
from pasture plant species.  Rush skeletonweed survival 
relies on a lack of competition, which is of greater 
importance than increased nutrient levels.  That said, 
nutrient management of hay lands and pastures will 
stimulate desired plant vigor and reduce the risk of 
invasion by rush skeletonweed. 
 
A study in Idaho shrub-steppe communities found a 
nearly six-fold increase in rush skeletonweed rosette 
emergence where wildfires burned compared to non-
burned sites the autumn following the burn.  Insulated by 
the soil, rush skeletonweed roots are protected from 
killing heat of fire.  There was also greater seed 
germination on fire-affected soil compared to unaffected 
soil.  The disturbance of fire produces conditions 
favorable to rush skeletonweed invasion and population 
expansion.  Prescribed burning should not be conducted 
in or near areas where rush skeletonweed has invaded 
unless follow-up management is applied. 
 
Rush skeletonweed is good forage for sheep and goats 
because it is palatable and nutritious in the rosette and 
early bolting stages.  Continuous grazing in the spring and 
summer will keep it in the rosette stage, but it will quickly 
flower if grazing is discontinued.  Continuous grazing of 
larger populations is a good strategy to prevent flowering 
and seed production and thus restrict spread to distant 
sites along wind currents.  Many populations throughout 
the Intermountain West are small and therefore prescribed 
grazing as a control may not be  
practical.  However, prescribed grazing is recommended 
as a preventative management by maintaining a 
competitive pasture or rangeland plant community. 
 
Three biological control agents have been released to 
manage rush skeletonweed but they have been successful 
only in certain locations.  The skeletonweed root moth, 
Bradyrrhoa gilveolella, was introduced in Idaho in 2002 
but establishment has not been confirmed by 2009.  The 
rush skeletonweed gall midge, Cystiphora schmidti, was 
first released in California in 1975 and is available for 

mass collection in California, Idaho, and Oregon.  It 
damages rosettes and flowering stems reducing seed 
production.  The rush skeletonweed rust fungus, Puccinia 
chondrillina, is the first exotic plant pathogen to succeed 
as a classical biological control agent in North America 
by reducing rush skeletonweed to “tolerable levels.”  It is 
readily available for redistribution in California, Idaho, 
Oregon, and Washington.  The effectiveness of biocontrol 
agents vary depending on local conditions and plant 
genotype.  The rust appears more effective in California 
and the mite appears to be more important in eastern 
Washington. 
 
Rush skeletonweed is not tolerant of shade and is seldom 
found on closed forest canopy sites.  Disturbance is 
favorable to rush skeletonweed and removal of natural 
vegetation provides opportunities for establishment.  
Revegetation of disturbances is therefore an important 
measure to provide competition and hinder rush 
skeletonweed invasion.  The use of legumes in crop-
pasture rotations has been effective in reducing 
populations of the weed.  The deeply-rooted alfalfa is 
advantageous because it is competitive for deep soil 
moisture.  Alfalfa also increases soil fertility and plant 
competition to reduce rush skeletonweed populations. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
Not applicable. 
 
References 
Kinter, C.L., B.A. Mealor, N.L. Shaw, and A.L. Hild.  
2007.  Postfire invasion potential of rush 
 
skeletonweed (Chondrilla juncea).  Rangeland 
 
 
Ecology and Management.  60(4): 386-394. 
Panetta, F.D. and J. Dodd.  1987.  The biology of 
 
 
 
Piper, G.L., E.M. Coombs, G.P. Markin, and D.B. Joley.  
 
 
 
 
 
Sheley, R. L., J.M. Hudak, and R.T. Grubb.  1999.  Rush 
 
 
 
 

2004.  Rush skeletonweed.  In:  Coombs, E. M., 
Coombs, J. K. Clark, G. L., and A. F. Cofrancesco, 
Jr. (eds) Biological control of invasive plants in the 
United States.  Oregon State University Press, 
Corvallis.  293-303. 

Australian weeds 16. Chondrilla juncea L.  The 
Journal of Australian Institute of Agricultural Science 
53(2): 83-95. 

skeletonweed.  In:  Biology and Management of 
Noxious Rangeland Weeds.  Oregon State Press.  
Pages 350-361. 

Prepared By: 
James S. Jacobs, Plant Materials Specialist 
Montana/Wyoming, USDA NRCS, Bozeman, MT 
 
Kim Goodwin, Weed Prevention Coordinator, Montana 
State University, Bozeman, MT 
 
Daniel G. Ogle, Plant Materials Specialist Idaho/Utah, 
USDA NRCS, Boise, ID 
 
Species Coordinator: 
 
James S. Jacobs, Plant Materials Specialist 
Montana/Wyoming, Bozeman, MT  
 

Citation 
Jacobs, J., Goodwin, K., Ogle, D. 2009 Plant Guide for 
rush skeletonweed (Chondrilla juncea L.
Resources Conservation Service, Montana State Office, 
Bozeman, MT  59715 

). USDA-Natural 

Published October, 2009 
 
Edited:  11Aug09JSJ; 12Aug09DGO  

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

