                          Plant Guide  

 

JONES’ WAXY 

DOGBANE 

Cycladenia humilis Benth. var. 
jonesii (Eastw.) S.L. Welsh & 

N.D. Atwood 

Plant Symbol = CYHUJ 

 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Idaho and Utah Plant 
Materials Program 
 

Description 
General: Dogbane family (Apocynaceae). Jones’ 
waxy dogbane is a long lived herbaceous perennial 
forb. At maturity, plants are 10 to 15 cm (4 to 6 in) 
tall with wide, oval or elliptical leaves. The flowers 
are trumpet shaped, whitish pink to purple, and 
somewhat resemble morning glory flowers. The plant 
forms an underground woody crown extending to a 
deep taproot. The plants are clonal and may spread 
via rhizomes and stolons (Sipes and Wolf, 1997; 
Wolf et al., 1992). 
 
Distribution: 
Jones’ waxy dogbane has been found in Emery, 
Grand, Garfield and Kane Counties Utah and in 
Mohave County, Arizona. For current distribution, 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Habitat:  
Jones’ waxy dogbane grows in arid sites at 1,300 to 
1,800 m (4,300 to 6,000 ft) elevation in desert scrub 
and juniper plant communities receiving 6 to 9 inches 
of mean annual precipitation. 
 
Adaptation 
This species is endemic to gypsiferous, saline soils of 
the Cutler, Summerville, and Chinle geologic 
formations. It is adapted to the arid desert scrub 
environment due to its deep taproot (Welsh et al., 
2003). 
 
Management 
Jones’ waxy dogbane has extremely limited fruiting 
and seed set. No seedling germination has been 
observed in multiple surveys. It is believed that the 
species has a complex pollination system and that 
suitable pollinators may have been lost (Sipes and 
Tepidino, 1996). Lack of recruitment puts this 
species at serious risk to habitat disturbances. 
 
The major threats to Jones’ waxy dogbane habitat are 
off-highway vehicle (OHV) use, and oil, gas, and 
mineral exploration. Additional threats include 
mountain biking and livestock grazing. 
 
It has recently been determined that Jones’ waxy 
dogbane is genetically similar to California 
populations of Cycladenia humilis and has therefore 
been recommended for delisting (Last, 2009). 
 
 
 

 

Jones’ waxy dogbanec (Cycladenia humilis var. jonesii). Photo 
from USDI-NPS 
 
Alternate Names 
Cycladenia jonesii 
Jones’ cycladenia 
 
Uses 
There are no known uses associated with Jones’ 
waxy dogbane.  
 
Status 
Jones’ waxy dogbane was listed as a threatened 
species by the USDI Fish and Wildlife Service in 
1986 (USDI-FWS, 1986).  In 2008 the USDI FWS 
published a recovery outline assigning Jones’ waxy 
dogbane a priority of 12C, moderate threat to a 
subspecies (USDI-FWS, 2008). 
 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
 
 

 

Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no known pests or potential problems 
associated with Jones’ waxy dogbane. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
There are no known environmental concerns 
associated with Jones’ waxy dogbane. 
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Jones’ waxy dogbane has not been observed to 
produce viable germinants. Natural seed set is limited 
and forced pollination has mostly resulted in aborted 
fruit. 
 
References 
Last, M.P. 2009. Intraspecific phylogeography of 

Cycladenia humilis (Apocynaceae). Unpublished 
master’s thesis. BYU. Provo, Utah. 

Sipes, S.D. and V.J. Tepedino. 1996. Pollinator lost? 

Reproduction by the enigmatic Jones’ 
cycladenia, Cycladenia humilis var. jonesii 
(Apocynaceae). In: Southwestern rare and 
endangered plants: proceedings of the second 
conference. Flagstaff, Arizona. Gen. Tech. Rep. 
RM-GTR-283. Fort Collins, Colorado.  

Sipes, S.D. and P.G. Wolf. 1997. Clonal structure and 

patterns of allozyme diversity in the rare 
endemic Cycladenia humilis var. jonesii 
(Apocynaceae). American Journal of Botany. 
84(3): 401-409. 

USDI-FWS. 1983. Endangered and threatened 

wildlife and plants; rule to determine Cycladenia 
humilis var. jonesii (Jones cycladenia) to be a 
threatened species. Federal Register. 51(86): 
16526-16530. 

Welsh, S.L., N.D. Atwood, S. Goodrich, and L.C. 
Higgins. 2003. A Utah Flora. Third Edition, 
revised. Brigham Young University, Provo, UT. 

Wolf, P.G., Sipes, S.D. and V.J. Tepedino. 1992. 

Population genetics of Cycladenia humilis var. 
jonesii. BLM. 

 
Prepared By 
Derek Tilley; USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho. 
 
Loren St. John, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho. 
 
Dan Ogle, USDA NRCS State Office, Boise, Idaho. 
 
Citation 
Tilley, D., St. John, L. and D. Ogle. 2010. Plant guide 
for Jones’ waxy dogbane (Cycladenia humilis var. 
jonesii). USDA-Natural Resources Conservation 
Service, Idaho Plant Materials Center. Aberdeen, ID. 

 
Edited: 20Dec2010djt; 20Dec2010dgo; 20Dec2010lsj 
 
For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or Conservation District 
<http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the PLANTS Web site 
<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials Program Web site 
<http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 

The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national origin, age, disability, and where applicable, 
sex, marital status, familial status, parental status, religion, sexual 
orientation, genetic information, political beliefs, reprisal, or 
because all or a part of an individual's income is derived from any 
public assistance program. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all 
programs.) Persons with disabilities who require alternative 
means for communication of program information (Braille, large 
print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA's TARGET Center at 
(202) 720-2600 (voice and TDD).  

To file a complaint of discrimination write to USDA, Director, 
Office of Civil Rights, 1400 Independence Avenue, S.W., 
Washington, D.C. 20250-9410 or call (800) 795-3272 (voice) or 
(202) 720-6382 (TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider 
and employer." 

Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service.  

 

 

