 
 

 

Plant Guide

Native Americans used the plant for both medicinal 
purposes and as a food source. Their roots were chewed 
for their pleasant, sweet taste by many Indian tribes that 
lived on the prairie (Kindscher 1987). Kindscher (1987) 
also stated that the leaves were dried and used for making 
a hot beverage. The pulverized root was boiled, and after 
the sediment settled, the liquid was consumed to prevent 
disease (Kindscher 1992). 

Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Description 
The Legume family (Fabaceae). Dalea is named in honor 
of Samuel Dale, an English botanist (1659-1739), and 
candida refers to the flower color meaning “of dazzling 
white” (Kindscher 1992). White prairie clover is a 
perennial, warm season, herbaceous, native legume 
common in the Great Plains (Stubbendieck and Conard 
1989). Stems, one to several, arise from a thick taproot or 
superficial or subterranean caudex. Stems are herbaceous 
and are simple with a few upright branches near the top 
and are ribbed or ridged longitudinally and glabrous (60 
to 90 cm). Leaves have an alternate arrangement on the 
stem and are odd-pinnately compound and 2 to 6 cm long. 
Each compound leaf has 5 to 9 leaflets (commonly 7) 
which are 1 to 3 cm long and 2 to 6 mm wide. Leaflet 
shape is narrowly oblanceolate to narrowly elliptic with a 
sharp tip. Leaflets are glandular dotted on their lower 
surface and folded along the midrib. The inflorescence is 
a terminal spike that is cylindrical in shape (1 to 5 cm) 
and lax to densely flowered. The white flower petals are 
atypical of legume family, having one standard and four 
narrow petal-like bodies joined with the five stamen bases 
to form the calyx tube. Flowering occurs from early to 
mid June and into August. The first flowers to open are at 
the bottom of the spike and proceed upward as the season 
progresses. The fruit is a legume 2.5 to 4.5 mm long, 
glandular and contains one brown, smooth seed that is 1.5 
to 2 mm long and kidney shaped. Chromosome number is 
2n=14. 
 
Distribution: For current distribution, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. According to the Flora of the Great Plains (GP) white 
prairie clover has two varieties in the GP (Barkley 1986). 
The var. candida occurs in the eastern half of the GP, 
infrequent in the west. It is located in southeast 
Saskatchewan, southern Manitoba, southern Ontario, 
south to Wisconsin, Illinois, Tennessee, eastern half of 
Kansas and Texas. The var. oligophylla occurs in the 

WHITE PRAIRIE 

CLOVER  

Dalea candida Michx. ex Willd. 

Plant Symbol = DACA7 

Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Manhattan, Kansas 

 
Mike Haddock, Kansas Wildflowers and Grasses, KSU Library Website 

 

Alternate Names 
Common Alternate Names:  Slender white prairie clover 
and prairie clover 

Uses 
This leguminous forb produces palatable and nutritious 
forage for all classes of livestock and is an important 
browse species for antelope, deer and upland game birds, 
particularly sharp-tail grouse. This species will decrease 
and disappear under persistent overgrazing. It is an 
important legume in native grasslands because of its 
nitrogen fixing characteristic. This native legume can be 
used as the forb component in reclamation of drastically 
disturbed lands, range renovation and prairie restoration 
projects. It is also a potentially useful plant for roadside 
and rest area beautification, park plantings and 
recreational garden natural area plantings.  

 

western half of the Great Plains infrequent in the 
southeast and extends from west Texas to Utah and 
Arizona in the southwest.  
 
Habitat: White prairie clover is common in dry prairies 
and rocky upland woods. Where the two varieties grow in 
the same area var. oligophylla will be located in the drier 
site positions. Weaver and Fitzpatrick (1934) indicated 
that white prairie clover was the third most important 
legume and the eighth most important forb in upland 
prairies.   
 
Adaptation 
This species is found growing primarily on well drained 
sandy, gravelly, and silt soils, rarely on clay or lowland 
sites. It occurs on sites that receive 25 to 45 cm of annual 
precipitation. Thus it would be found growing most 
commonly in mid to short grass prairie plant 
communities. It is found as a minor species in late seral 
grasslands. However, it has been observed as a pioneering 
species on disturbed shallow soils or gravels. 
 
Establishment 
Stubbendieck and Conard (1989) stated that germination 
can be improved by scarification. Germination can extend 
from 3 to 30 days, but most seed will germinate within 6 
to 9 days ( Platt and Harder 1991). Mechanical 
scarification using sandpaper or a laboratory scarifier is 
acceptable. White prairie clover should be planted on a 
prepared, weed free, firm seedbed. The seedbed should be 
firm enough to allow planting at a 6 to 12 mm depth. 
McGraw et al. (2003) found that white prairie clover 
germinated well in a range of temperatures between 15 
and 30 degrees Centigrade.  Being able to germinate 
across a wide range of temperatures may be an advantage 
in temperate climates where a wide range of soil 
temperatures may be encountered. Planting using a drill 
equipped with depth bands and a legume box should 
provide good seed depth placement and good seed to soil 
contact. The use of a broadcast seeding method would 
require a higher overall seeding rate to compensate for a 
less accurate delivery system. The normal seeding rate of 
323 to 388 PLS seeds per meter square would have to be 
increased to accommodate a broadcast seeding method. 
Seed should be inoculated with the proper Rhizobium 
strain prior to planting.  
 
Management 
Weed control during first year establishment of native 
forbs is essential to produce healthy plant stands. Mowing 
at a height that will not affect white prairie clover 
seedlings is one method of reducing weed competition. 
McGraw et al. (2004) found that while white prairie 
clover had good relative forage quality it also suffered 
from having relatively low forage yields when compared 
to other native legume species. White prairie clover 
should improve forage digestibility when planted in 
pasture situations with native warm season grasses. 
Native legumes such as white prairie clover fix nitrogen 

 

 

from the atmosphere and make it available to grass 
species planted in association with the legume. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 

White prairie clover was discovered to be a host for 
Megacyllene angulifera in Carbon County, Montana 
(Blodgett et al. 2005). A white clover plant was observed 
to have an unknown die off in the seed production field at 
the Bridger PMC. Subsequent investigation of the damage 
revealed that 10 per cent of the root had extensive injury 
from the feeding of cerambycid larvae. The damaged area 
had 12 pupae present. The pupae were placed in a Petri 
dish with moisture and in 1 to 5 days the pupae evolved 
into adult M. angulifera. Plant Pathologists at Kansas 
State University found that the rust species Uropyxis 
petalostemonis had an increased incidence of disease on 
white prairie clover under irrigated situations (Ahmed 
2002). They also indicated that the rust disease had a 
profound effect on the relative fitness and fecundity of the 
D. candida population on the Konza Prairie Biological 
Station.  
 
Environmental  Concerns 
White prairie clover does not spread aggressively by seed 
or vegetative means.  

Seeds and Plant Production 
Seed production of white prairie clover should be 
accomplished by establishment of the plants in rows with 
spacing of 45 to 75 cm between rows. This arrangement 
will allow for cultivation between rows and irrigation. 
Seed production should not be attempted without 
supplemental irrigation in areas with less than 380 mm of 
precipitation. White prairie clover is insect pollinated and 
up to 18 different wasps and bees and other insect 
pollinators have been identified in the foundation 
production field at the Bridger, Montana PMC. Annual 
warm-season grasses and broadleaf weeds are the biggest 
problem to establishment and production of this legume. 
Seed production can be expected the second year. 
Legume pods can be run through a hammer mill to knock 
the kidney shaped seed out of its pod. A fanning mill can 
be used to complete the cleaning process. Seed yields of 
up to 225 to 450 kg/ha can be expected with irrigation. 
Rock (1981) reported that division and vegetative 
propagation of this species was difficult. Stubbendieck 
and Conard (1989) indicated that branch tip cuttings of 
this species readily root in a mist bench    

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office for 
more information.  Look in the phone book under ”United 
States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 

host record for Megacyllene angulifera (Casey) 
(Cerambycidea). The Coleopterists Bulletin. 59(2): 
258-259. 

and A.K. Knapp. 2002. Reduced fitness of Dalea 
candida due to Uropyxis petalostemonis rust at 
different precipitation levels in the Kansas tallgrass 
prairie. Plant Pathology Poster. Kansas State 

References 
Ahmed, H.U., K.A. Garrett, H.M. Alexander, S.P. Dendy 
 
 
 
 
  University Department of Pant Pathology. 
Barkley, T.M., R.L. McGregor, R.E. Brooks, and E.K. 
 
Schofield. 1986. Flora of the Great Plains. 
  Lawerence,KS: University Press of Kansas. 
Blodgett, S., M.A. Ivie, and M. Majerus. 2005. First larval 
 
 
 
Kindscher, K. 1987. Edible wild plants of the prairie. 
  Lawrence: University of Kansas Press. 
Kindscher, K. 1992. Medicinal wild plants of the prairie. 
  Lawrence: University Press of Kansas. 
Majerus, M. and L.K. Holzworth. 2000. Release notice of 
 
 
  Materials Center, Bridger, MT. 
McGraw, R.L., F.W. Shockley, and T.K. Elam. 2003. 
  Effects of temperature on germination of 10 native 
 
McGraw, R.L., F.W. Shockley, J.F. Thompson, and C.A. 
  Roberts. 2004. Native legume species for forage yield, 
 
quality, and seed production. Native Plants. Fall 2004. 
Platt, D.R. and L.H. Harder. 1991. Growing Native 
  Wildflowers: The Kansas Wildflower Society 
  Handbook. Kauffman Museum, Bethel College, 
  Newton, KS.  
Rock, H.W. 1981. Prairie Propagation Handbook. Sixth 
  Edition. Boerner Botanical Garden. Milwaukee, WI.  
Stubbendieck, J. and E.C. Conard. 1989.Common 
 
  Nebraska Press.  
Weaver, J.E. and T.J. Fitzpatrick. 1934. The Prairie. 
  Ecological Monographs 4(2):109-295. 
 
Prepared By:  Richard Wynia, USDA NRCS Manhattan 
Plant Materials Center, Manhattan, Kansas 

antelope tested class germplasm slender white 
prairieclover Dalea candida. USDA-NRCS Plant 

legume species. Native Plants. Spring 2003. 

legumes of the Great Plains. Lincoln: University of 

Citation 
Wynia, R., 2008. Plant Guide for white prairie clover  
(Dalea candida Michx. ex Willd.)  USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Manhattan Plant 
Materials Center, Manhattan, KS   66502. 

Published   February 2008 
 
Edited: 080206 jsp 
 
 
 

 

 
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

