 
 

 

Plant Guide

purpurea) yields more than 20,000 seeds per plant 
when pollinated by agricultural pollinators Apis 
mellifera and Megachile rotundata (Cane 2006). 
  
Beautification:  This plant is an excellent choice for 
beautification of roadsides, rest areas and parks. 

Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Description 
General: Legume family (Fabaceae).  Western prairie 
clover is a perennial, herbaceous North American 
legume that grows to 12 – 24 inches in height.  It has 
a cluster of stems that arise from a taproot.  Dried 
stems are also usually present from previous years.  
Leaves are 1.6 to 2 inches long, alternate and odd-
pinnate, comprised of 5 – 7 oval shaped leaflets, each 
0.4 – 0.8 inch long.  Leaves and stems are dotted with 
tiny glands.  The plant is hairless except for long 
silky hairs on the calyces.  Flowers occur in dense, 
cylinder-shaped spikes which are 0.8 – 2.4 inches 
long.  The flowers are light pink to purple in color 
and have 5 petals.  One petal is broad-clawed and 
attached to the calyx.  The other 4 petals are narrow-
clawed, attached to the staminal tube and alternate 
with the 5 stamens.  The flowers bloom upward along 
the spike May – July.  Seedpods are enclosed by the 
calyces and contain 1 or 2 seeds.  The plant is 
primarily insect-pollinated and has a variable degree 
of self-incompatibility. 
 
Distribution: Western prairie clover is native to 
southeastern Washington, western Idaho, eastern 
Oregon, northern California and northwestern 
Nevada.  It is relatively uncommon.  For a current 
distribution map, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Habitat: Western prairie clover is found in 
sagebrush-steppe habitats in the southern Columbia 
Plateau, the Blue Mountains and the northern Great 
Basin.   

Adaptation 
Western prairie clover is adapted to low to moderate 
elevations and is characteristic of soft clay and sandy 
soils derived from weathering of basalt and volcanic 
ash (Barneby 1977).   

WESTERN PRAIRIE 

Dalea ornata (Douglas) Eaton 

CLOVER 

& Wright 

Plant Symbol = DAOR2 

 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Pullman, Washington 
 

Kishor Bhattarai, Utah State University 

 

Alternate Names 
Blue Mountain prairie clover, showy prairie clover, 
ornate dalea, Petalostemon ornatus Douglas ex. 
Hook, Petalostemon ornatum Douglas, Kuhnistera 
ornata (Douglas) Kuntze, Petalostemon lagopus 
Rydb., Petalostemon ornatum fo. pallidus H. St. John 

Uses 
Rangeland revegetation: Western prairie clover can 
be used in seeding mixes for diversification and 
revegetation of rangelands.   
 
Forage:  Western prairie clover is a non-toxic legume 
and has the potential for increasing forage production 
and quality (Bhattarai et al. 2009). 

Pollinator habitat: Dalea ornata attracts native bee 
fauna as well as managed agricultural pollinators.  A 
similar species native to the Great Plains (D.  

 

Establishment 
This species can be established by seed; however 
availability of seed for this species is extremely 
limited.  With releases planned in the near future by 
the ARS Forage and Range Research Laboratory in 
Logan, UT, and the Pullman Plant Materials Center 
in Pullman, WA, more seed may become available.   
 
To establish a planting, the seed must first be 
scarified using sandpaper or a laboratory scarifying 
device.  Seed also can be scarified by soaking in 98% 
sulfuric acid, rinsed with water and air-dried.  The 
seed should be planted with a drill into a prepared, 
firm, weed-free seed bed at a depth of ¼ - ½ inch and 
at a rate of 4 – 5 pounds Pure Live Seed (PLS) per 
acre.  If the seed is planted in a mix, the seeding rate 
should be adjusted according to the proportion of the 
mix. If the seed is broadcast, the seeding rate should 
be doubled.  To improve the plant's ability to 
establish and fix nitrogen, the seed should be 
inoculated with the proper Rhizobium bacteria strain 
prior to planting. 

Management 
In all native forb plantings, weeds must be managed 
for several years to ensure successful establishment.  
One of the most common options for weed 
management is application of herbicide.  In 
Nebraska, Masters et al. (1996) found stands of  
purple prairie clover (D. purpurea) had greater foliar 
cover when treated with imidazolinonone herbicides 
(imazapyr and imazethapyr) compared to untreated 
stands.  Numerous pre- and post-emergent herbicides 
are labeled for rangeland use and can be applied to 
cover an entire area or spot-sprayed.  Another 
management option that can be used alone or in 
combination with herbicide application is mowing.  
The mower should be set at a height that does not 
negatively affect the seedlings of desired species.   

Pests and Potential Problems 
Seedlings of Dalea ornata may be damaged by 
rodents and insects. 

Environmental Concerns 
This plant does not appear to spread aggressively by 
seed or vegetative means. 

Seeds and Plant Production 
When growing western prairie clover for seed 
production, the seed should be planted at a rate of 25 
– 30 PLS per lineal foot (Cornforth, et al 2009).  The 
Forage and Range Research Laboratory in Logan, 
UT, has determined Dalea ornata has 283 – 340 
seeds per gram (128,367 – 154,227 seeds per pound) 
depending on environmental factors and genotype.  
The plants continue to flower while seed produced 
earlier in the season matures, complicating the 
harvest process. 

 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
None 

References 
Barneby, R.C.  1977.  Daleae imagines.  Memoirs of 

the New York Botanical Garden 27:1-892. 

Bhattarai, K., B.S. Bushman, D.A. Johnson and J.G. 

Carman.  2009.  Characterization of the 
population structures in the wildland collections 
of Dalea ornata and D. searlsiae from the 
western U.S.  Society for Range Management 
62nd Annual Meeting, Alberquerque, NM, 2009. 
Paper No. 1000-6. [Online]. Available at 
http://www.srmmeetings.org/pdf_Abstracts/pstr
A1000_Ecology/1000_6.pdf (Accessed 29 
October 2009).  USDA-ARS, Logan, UT.   
Burke Museum of Natural History and Culture.  

 

[Online]. Available at 
http://biology.burke.washington.edu/herbarium/i
magecollection.php?Genus=Dalea&Species=orn
ata. (Accessed 29 Oct 2009). University of 
Washington, Seattle, WA. 

Cane, J.  2006.  An evaluation of pollination 

mechanisms for purple prairie clover, Dalea 
purpurea (Fabaceae: Amorpheae).  Am. Midl. 
Nat. 156:193-197. 

Cornforth, B., L. St. John and D. Ogle.  2001.  Seed 
Production Standards for Conservation Plants in 
the Intermountain West.  USDA-NRCS Plant 
Materials Technical Note No. 14.  Boise, ID. 
Davis, R.J. 1952. Flora of Idaho. W.M.C. Brown 

Company, Dubuque, IA. 

Hitchcock, C.L. and A. Cronquist. 1973. Flora of the 

Pacific Northwest. University of Washington 
Press, Seattle, WA. 

Masters, R.A., S.J. Nissen, R.D. Gaussoin, D.D. 

Beran and R.N. Stougaard.  1996. Imidazolinone 
herbicides improve restoration of Great Plains 
grasslands.  Weed Technology.  10:392-403. 

USDA-ARS. 2009.  Improved Plant Genetic 

Resources for Pastures and Rangelands in the 
Temperate Semiarid Regions of the Western 
U.S.  2009 Annual Report. [Online]. Available at 
http://afrsweb.usda.gov/research/projects/project
s.htm?ACCN_NO=412652 (Accessed 29 Oct 
2009). USDA-ARS, Logan, UT. 

 
Prepared By 
Pamela Scheinost, USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Pullman, Washington 
 
Douglas A. Johnson, USDA ARS Forage and Range 
Research Laboratory, Logan, Utah 
 
James H. Cane, USDA ARS Pollinating Insects 
Research Unit, Logan, Utah 

Citation 

 

 

Scheinost, P., D.A. Johnson and J.H. Cane. 2009.  
Plant guide for western prairie clover (Dalea ornata).  
USDA-Natural Resources Conservation Service, 
Pullman Plant Materials Center.  Pullman, WA. 

Published November 2009 
 
Edited: 13nov2009 jhc; 13nov2009 daj; 17 nov2009 ps; 
20Nov2009 jb; 3Dec2009 ps 

For more information about this and other plants, 
please contact your local NRCS field office or 
Conservation District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ 
and visit the PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant Materials Program 
Web site http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or 
availability of other Web sites. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

