 
 

 

Plant Guide

steeped in water and applied to fresh, open wounds. 
Ponca Indians chewed the roots for their pleasant flavor 
and made tea from the leaves. Pawnee Indians used the 
bundled stems to make brooms. (Stubbendieck et al. 
1989). 

Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Description 
 General: The Legume family (Fabaceae). Purple prairie 
clover is a native, warm season, herbaceous, perennial, 
leguminous forb. The plant has an erect type growth habit 
that typically grows to a height of  
30 to 90 cm. It can be identified by its alternate, pinnately 
compound leaves and multiple stems which arise annually 
from a woody caudex. The inflorescence is a terminal 
spike (2-4 cm), numerous, many-flowered and cylindrical 
in shape. The flower petals which are rose-purple with 
projecting gold-orange anthers are small and simple 
compared to many pea shaped flowers of typical legumes. 
The calyx is densely villous. Flower petals are 6 mm long, 
4 of the petals and the five stamens are joined near the 
calyx tip and the banner petal is separate. The first 
flowers to bloom are located at the bottom of the spike 
and the circle of flowers moves upward along the spike as 
new buds open and old flowers fade. Pollination is 
accomplished by a host of native insects ranging from 
bumblebees to beetles (Art, 1991). The fruit is a one 
seeded legume pod enclosed by the persistent calyx which 
is 2-2.5 mm long. The legume seed is yellowish-green to 
brown and is 1.5-2.0 mm long and punctuate. Purple 
prairie clover flowers the last of May to September in the 
central Great Plains. It flowers some what later (July-
August) in the northern Great Plains. This plant is deep 
rooted with a 2.0 meter tap root. It also has three to seven 
lateral roots within the upper 30 cm of tap root which 
extend horizontally up to 45 cm before turning downward 
(Weaver, 1954).  
 
Distribution: For current distribution, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. Purple prairie clover ranges from Indiana to 
Saskatchewan and Montana, south to Tennessee, 
Arkansas, Texas and New Mexico. It is also found in 
Alabama and has been introduced east into New York 
State.  
 
Habitat:  Purple prairie clover occurs in prairies, rocky 
open glades, along railroad tracks, and rocky or open 
woods. 

PURPLE PRAIRIE 

CLOVER 

Dalea purpurea Vent. 

Plant Symbol = DAPU5 

 
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Manhattan, Kansas 

R. Alan Shadow, East Texas PMC, Nacogdoches, TX 

  

Alternate Names 
Common Alternate Names: violet prairie clover, red 
tassel flower, thimbleweed, and wanahcha (Lakota) 

Uses 
This leguminous forb produces excellent forage for 
livestock and wildlife. It is high in protein and highly 
palatable, although it may cause bloat. (Stubbedieck and 
Conard 1989) This species will decrease and disappear 
under persistent overgrazing. It is an important legume in 
native grasslands because of nitrogen fixation. Purple 
prairie clover is used in seed mixtures for re-vegetation 
and prairie restoration. It is a potentially useful plant for 
roadside and rest area beautification, park plantings and 
recreational garden natural area plantings. This species is 
also used in mixtures on dam face structures and critical 
area plantings. Native Americans ate fresh and boiled 
leaves of purple prairie clover. Bruised leaves were 

 

Adaptation 
This species grows on prairies, plains, and hills  
in soils ranging from clay loams to loamy sands. Found 
growing more vigorously on well drained sites and 
moderately alkaline calcareous soils. Thrives in 40 to 50 
cm precipitation zones, but found in suitable sites in the 
30 to 38 cm rainfall zones. Purple prairie clover is 
moderately drought tolerant, has fair fire tolerance in its 
dormant state, and fairly shade tolerant and medium in 
competitiveness. Local ecotypes are fairly winter hardy 
and plants have been found up to about 2,200 meters in 
elevation in the Rocky Mountains. Purple prairie clover is 
normally found growing in association with native warm-
season grasses such as Sorghastrum nutans, Bouteloua 
curtipendula, Andropogon gerardii, Schizachyrium 
scoparium, and Panicum virgatum. 

Establishment 
This species is easily established from seed and the seed 
is commercially available through plant vendors. 
Germination of this species is rather poor without some 
type of scarification procedure. Mechanical scarification 
using sandpaper or a laboratory scarifier is acceptable. 
Purple prairie clover should be planted on a prepared, 
weed free, firm seedbed. The seedbed should be firm 
enough to allow planting at a 6 to 12 mm depth. Seed 
should be inoculated with the proper Rhizobium 
(Nitragin-type F) strain prior to planting.  
 
Planting using a drill with depth bands and a legume box 
would provide good seed depth placement and seed to soil 
contact. The use of broadcast seeding will require a 
greater overall seeding rate to compensate for a less 
accurate delivery system. A normal seeding rate of 323 to 
388 PLS seeds per square meter would have to be 
increased to accommodate a broadcast seeding. 
 
Fischbach et al. (2005) found that in Minnesota in a 
seeding rate experiment that purple prairie clover had 
increased number of seedlings the year after 
establishment at all seeding rate levels tested. All legumes 
in the test had the highest percentage of seeds that 
develop into plants at the lowest seeding rate and the 
lowest seeds that develop into plants at the highest 
seeding rate. Launchbaugh and Owensby (1970), working 
with several native grass species, also noticed an inverse 
relationship between increased seeding rates and final 
plant establishment. 

Management 
Weed control during establishment of native forbs is 
essential to produce healthy plant stands. Mowing at a 
height that will not affect purple prairie clover seedlings 
is one method of reducing weed competition. Masters et 
al. (1996) found that the use of Imidazolinone herbicides 
was successfully used to establish purple prairie clover. 
Irrigated and non-irrigated plots of purple prairie clover 
experienced greater foliar cover when treated with 

 

 

herbicides when compared to non-herbicide treated plots 
(Masters et al. 1996).  
 
McGraw et al. (2004) found that while purple prairie 
clover tended to have good forage quality, it had 
relatively poor forage yields when compared to other 
native legumes. Posler et al. (1993) found that the 
influence of purple prairie clover was positive on forage 
digestibility when compared to values for grasses alone. 
They concluded that the use of mixtures of purple prairie 
clover with adapted warm-season grasses as forage crops 
appeared promising.  

Pests and Potential Problems 
Grasshoppers and small rodents in moderate numbers can 
cause damage to seedling stands.  

Environmental Concerns 
Purple prairie clover does not spread aggressively by seed 
or vegetatively (Platt and Harder 1991). 

Seeds and Plant Production 
McGraw et al. (2004) determined seed production 
potential by measuring the weight of seeds per plant and 
the number of seeds per plant. Purple prairie clover which 
produced only 2.1 g of seed per plant, produced as many 
seeds per plant as the top three legumes due to its 
relatively smaller seed size. Purple prairie clover averaged 
698 seed per gram which yields 698,000 seeds per 
kilogram which would be  317,000 seeds per pound for 
this species. Seed can be collected by hand stripping pods 
from mature plants and then hammer milling and re-
cleaning in a fanning mill. Field size stands can be 
harvested with a standard combine and then cleaned in a 
fanning mill.  
 
Five year average seed yields at Manhattan Plant 
Materials Center (PMC) were 136.5 kg per hectare. Purity 
of harvested, processed seed is typically 99 percent or 
better with a germination range of 36 to 83 percent 
(including germination and hard seed). A long term seed 
storage study conducted by the Manhattan PMC indicates 
that ‘Kaneb’ purple prairie clover can be stored 
successfully under ideal (cool and dry) conditions for up 
to 26 years and retain good germination. Kaneb’s initial 
germination was 81 percent and after 26 years of storage 
the germination result was still 77 percent. There was 
however, a much lower percentage of hard seed in the 
latest test results when compared to the initial test results. 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service office for more information.  Look in the phone 
book under ”United States Government.”  The Natural 
Resources Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Department of Agriculture.” 
‘Kaneb’ purple prairie clover was released by the 
Manhattan, Kansas Plant Materials Center in 1975 in 
cooperation with the Nebraska Agriculture Experiment 

Station in Lincoln, Nebraska. It was first collected in 
1948 in a native grassland area in Riley County, Kansas. 
Testing indicated it was superior in stand, height and 
vigor to other collected accessions. This accession was 
also grown and tested at SCS Plant Materials Center’s in 
North Dakota and New Mexico. Foundation seed is 
maintained by the Manhattan Plant Materials Center. 
 
Bismarck Germplasm is a selected class release from the 
Bismarck, North Dakota Plant Materials Center. It was 
collected originally in 1975 in Lyman County, South 
Dakota by Tom Pozarnsky. Bismarck was compared to 
ten purple prairie clover accessions and was selected for 
its superior vigor, forage abundance and above average 
seed yield. Generation 1 seed is maintained by the 
Bismarck Plant Materials Center and is available in 
limited quantities for commercial seed increase.  
 
Central Iowa Germplasm is a source identified release 
from the Elsberry, Missouri Plant Materials Center. It is a 
composite of collections of purple prairie clover made 
through out central Iowa. Breeder’s seed is maintained by 
the Elsberry Plant Materials Center and the University of 
Northern Iowa (UNI) at Cedar falls, Iowa. Source 
identified seed will be available to interested seed 
producers.  

Storey Communications Inc. Pownal, VT. 

References 
Art, H.W. 1991. The Wildflower Gardener’s Guide: 
  Midwest, Great Plains, and Canadian Prairies Edition. 
 
Fischbach, J.A., N.J. Ehlke, P.R. Peterson, D.L. Wyse, 
  D.R. Swanson, and C.C. Shaeffer. 2005. Seeding rate 
affects establishment of native perennial legumes in 
 
the upper Midwestern U.S. Native Plants. Spring 
 
 
2006. 
Launchbaugh, J.L. and C.E. Owensby. 1970. Seeding rate 
 
and first year stand relationships for six native grasses. 
 
J. of Range Man. 23:414-417. 
Masters, R.A., S.J. Nissen, R.E. Gaussoin, D.D. Beran, 
and R.N. Stougaard. 1996. Imidazolinone herbicides 
 
 
improve restoration of Great Plains grasslands. Weed 
  Technology. 10(2): 392-403. 
McGraw, R.L., F.W. Shockley, J.F. Thompson, and C.A. 
  Roberts. 2004. Evaluation of native legume species 
 
for forage yield, quality, and seed production. 2004. 
  Native Plants. Fall 2004. 
Platt, D.R. and L.H. Harder. 1991. Growing Native 
  Wildflowers: The Kansas Wildflower Society 
  Handbook. Kauffman Museum, Bethel College, 
  Newton, KS. 
 
Posler, G.L., A.W. Lenssen, and G.L. Fine. 1993. Forage 
yield, quality, compatability, and persistence of warm-
 
 
season grass-legume mixtures. Agron. J. 85: 554-560. 

 

Stubbendieck, J and E.C. Conard. 1989. Common 
  Legumes of the Great Plains. Lincoln: University of 
  Nebraska Press. 
Stubbendieck, J., J.T. Nichols, C.H. Butterfield. 1989. 
  Nebraska Range and Pasture Forbs and Shrubs. 
  University of Nebraska Cooperative Extension 
  Bulletin EC 89-118-S. 
Weaver, J.E. 1954. North American Prairie. Lincoln(NE): 
 
 
Prepared By: Richard Wynia, USDA NRCS Manhattan 
Plant Materials Center, Manhattan, Kansas, and Jimmy 
Henry (Retired), Elsberry Plant Materials Center, 
Elsberry, Missouri 

Johnsen Publishing Co.  

Citation 
Wynia, R., 2008. Plant Guide for purple prairie clover  
(Dalea purpurea  Vent.)  USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Manhattan Plant Materials Center, 
Manhattan, KS   66502. 

Published February 2008 
Edited: 080128 jsp  

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

