 
 

 

Plant Guide

Velvet panicum is a native perennial bunchgrass. 
However, the plant’s lifespan is considered to be short 
when compared to other perennial plants. It has erect 
coarse stems up to 4.5 feet tall. The gray-green stems and 
leaves are covered with fine hairs. The leaves are .25 to 
1.0 inch wide which are smaller than broadleaf 
rosettegrass (D. latifolium) and Bosc’s panicgrass (D. 
boscii) (USDA-NRCS, 2007 and Grelen, 1984). The plant 
produces seed in the summer (May to June) and also in 
the fall. The fall seeds are found within the spikelet 
sheath. Velvet panicum is considered a C3 (cool season) 
photosynthetic pathway plant (Gould, 1978).  
Velvet panicum is a diploid (2n = 18). The plant tends to 
flower later than the other Dichanthelium species if they 
are present in a stand (Gould, 1978). There are 
approximately 380,000 seeds per pound; however, velvet 
panicum is considered a low volume seed producer 
(USDA-NRCS, 2007).  
 
Distribution 
 For current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  

Adaptation:  
Velvet panicum is adapted to the eastern United States 
from New York to Florida west to Kansas and Texas. 
This adaptation area corresponds to USDA Hardiness 
Zones 5b to 10b.  
 
Velvet panicum grows in areas with precipitation ranging 
from 30 to 55 inches. It prefers coarse and medium 
textured soils with pH range of 4.5 to 7.5. Velvet panicum 
is not tolerant of salinity (USDA-NRCS, 2007). This plant 
is found in sandy woods, bogs, marshes, and disturbed 
sites. It is often found scattered throughout new forest 
plantations (Miller, 1999). Velvet panicum is seldom 
found on burned or grazed forest range (Grelen, 1984).  

Establishment  
Fertilize planting area according to soil test for 
establishment. Maintain fertility levels at medium 
conditions and soil pH near 6.0. To reduce weed 
competition, do not over apply nitrogen fertilizer. 
 
Cold stratification is not required in preparation for 
planting (USDA-NRCS, 2007). Plant the seed at a rate of 
3.0 pure live seed pounds per acre in the fall when the 
ground is moist. Drill or hand plant seeds at a depth of ½” 
or less. If broadcasting, use a cultipacker to increase seed 
to soil contact. 
 

 

VELVET PANICUM 
Dichanthelium scoparium  

(Lam.) Gould 
Plant Symbol = DISC3 

Contributed by:  USDA NRCS East Texas Plant Materials 
Center 

 Melinda Brakie – USDA/Natural Resources Conservation Service  
 
Alternative Names 
 Velvet rosettegrass and broom panic-grass  

 

Uses  
Wildlife Value:  
Because of their wide distribution, Dichanthelium spp. 
provides an important source of food for songbirds, small 
mammals and game birds (Miller, 1999).  
 
Erosion Control:  
This species has a high tolerance of low pH conditions 
and is suitable for erosion control along roadsides and 
timber harvest areas.  

Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator value).  

Description  
General: Grass Family (Poaceae). To date, there are 26 
identified species of Dichanthelium spp. in the 
southeastern United States (Miller, 1999). This species is 
distinguished from other North American grasses by its 
unique growth pattern. A basal rosette is produced during 
fall and winter with stems developing in the spring 
(Gould, 1978).  

 

Management  
If managing as a planting: Do not over apply nitrogen 
fertilizer or keep soil fertility at a high level. Seed 
production maybe decreased by high fertility levels.  
 
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use it safely. Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method. Trade names 
and control measures appear in this document only to 
provide specific information. USDA NRCS does not 
guarantee or warranty the products and control methods 
named, and other products may be equally effective.  

Pests and Potential Problems  
Seed production:  
Velvet panicum will hybridize with tapered rosettegrass 
(D. acuminatum) and cypress panicgrass (D. dichotomum) 
(Diggs, 2006).  

Environmental Concerns  
This plant is considered an endangered species in Indiana. 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  

Seeds and Plant Production  
When managing for seed production, mow in the spring to 
clip off previous year’s growth.  
 
At the East Texas Plant Materials Center, velvet panicum 
produces two seed crops per year: an open seed panicle in 
the summer (May to June) and a closed seed panicle in 
the fall. Summer seed harvest is completed using a flail 
vac or combine. The flail vac harvests the mature seed 
without harming the plants; therefore multiple harvests 
can be completed on the same seed production field. The 
fall produced seeds are found in the spikelet sheath and 
can be harvested with a conventional combine.  
 
Summer harvesting of Pilgrim germplasm velvet panicum 
yielded 60 pounds of cleaned seed per acre.  
 
Seed is cleaned using a two screen air seed cleaner with a 
6/64 top screen and a 1/23 bottom screen with very little 
air flow.  

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
Pilgrim Germplasm velvet panicum (D. scoparium), 
released in 2007 by the East Texas Plant Materials Center, 
is a selected class for wildlife and critical area seedings. 
The intended area of use for this release is the 
southeastern United States.  
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office for 

 

more information. Look in the phone book under ”United 
States Government.” The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading “Department 
of Agriculture.” 
 

References 
Diggs, G., B. Lipscomb, M. Reed, and R.O’Kennon.  
     2006. Illustrated Flora of East Texas, vol.1. Botanical       
     Research Institute of Texas (BRIT), Fort Worth,  
     Texas.  
Grelen, H.E. and R.H. Hughes. 1984. Common  
     Herbaceous Plants of Southern Forest Range SO-210,  
     New Orleans, Louisiana.  
Gould, F. and C. Clark. 1978. Dichanthelium (Poaceae) in  
     the United States and Canada. Annals of the Missouri  
     Botanical Garden. 65: 1088-1132.  
Miller, J.H. and K.V Miller. 1999. Forest plants of the  
     southeast and their wildlife uses. Southern Weed  
     Science Society.  
USDA, NRCS. 2007. The PLANTS Database  
     (http://plants.usda.gov
     Data Center, Baton Rouge, LA 70874-4490 USA. 
 
Prepared By: Melinda Brakie, East Texas Plant Materials 
Center 

, 16 April 2007). National Plant  

Citation 
Brakie, M.  2007. Plant Guide for velvet panicum 
[Dichanthelium scoparium (Lam.) Gould]. USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, East Texas Plant 
Materials Center, Nacodoches, TX  75964 

Published September 2007 
Edited: 120911mb 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

