 

SEARLS’ PRAIRIE 

CLOVER 

Dalea searlsiae (A. Gray) Barneby 

Plant Symbol = DASE3 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS Idaho and Utah Plant 
Materials Program and USDA-ARS Forage and Range 
Research Laboratory 

 

 
Plant Guide

 
European settlers. The decline may be due to overgrazing.  
Searls’ prairie clover can be used to diversify seeding 
mixtures for rangeland revegetation as well as for 
pollinator habitat enhancement, home landscaping and 
roadside planting. 

Status 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State Department 
of Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values). 

Description and Adaptation 
General: Legume family (Fabaceae).  Searls’ prairie 
clover is a native, herbaceous legume with decumbent to 
erect stems.  It was named after Fanny Searls who first 
collected it near the Pahranagat Mines in southeastern 
Nevada in 1871 (Tiehm 1985).  Plants range from 10-24 
inches tall and arise from a shallow, woody base.  The 
leaves are odd-pinnate with 3 or more glabrous leaflets 
with glands on the underside.  Flower stalks bear a spike-
like cluster of small pink- to purple-colored flowers that 
bloom from the base to the tip of the cluster.  Although 
two ovules are present in each flower, only one seed 
matures per flower (Barneby 1977).  The fruit is a small 
hairy pod with one seed, and there are approximately 
148,000 seeds per pound based on seed counts from 17 
wildland collections. 
 

Gerald and Buff Corsi © California Academy of Sciences 

 

Alternate Names 
Petalostemon searlsiae A. Gray 
Kuhnistera searlsiae (A. Gray) Kuntze 

Uses 
Plants of Searls’ prairie clover are grazed by many 
animals including rabbits, deer, sheep and cattle.  This 
legume forms a symbiotic association with soil bacteria 
(Rhizobium spp.) that allows fixation of atmospheric 
nitrogen, which can enhance forage nitrogen content for 
wildlife and livestock.  Flowers are visited by pollinators, 
primarily bees, during bloom from June-July.  Searls’ 
prairie clover may have been more widely spread than its 
current distribution in the Great Basin, Colorado Plateau 
and the northern Mojave Desert prior to the arrival of  
 

Searls’ prairie clover distribution map from USDA-NRCS PLANTS 
Database. 

Distribution: Searls’ prairie clover is a perennial legume 
that occurs in portions of the Great Basin, Colorado 

 

 
Plateau, and northern Mojave Desert in the states of 
Arizona, California, Nevada and Utah at elevations 
ranging from 3,000-7,500 feet above sea level (Barneby 
1977, Cronquist et al. 1989, Welsh et al. 2008). 

For updated distribution, consult the Plant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site. 

Habitat: Searls’ prairie clover is commonly found on 
sandy or gravelly soils on flat areas, slopes and knolls in 
sagebrush, pinyon-juniper, warm-desert and cool-desert 
shrub plant communities that receive 6 to 14 inches of 
annual precipitation.  

Kevin Connors USDA-ARS-FRRL, Logan, UT 

 

Establishment 
There is little known about direct seeding Searls’ prairie 
clover.  The USDA-NRCS Aberdeen, Idaho Plant 
Materials Center has direct-seeded this species into weed 
barrier fabric as a dormant planting.  Seed was surface-
planted by hand and pressed into the soil surface and 
allowed to naturally stratify over winter. 
 
Transplants can be grown under greenhouse conditions, 
but seed must be scarified prior to planting to improve 
germination.  As with many native legumes, Searls’ 
prairie clover has a high percentage of hard seed (as high 
as 90 % or greater in one year old seed).  Studies at the 
USDA-ARS Forage and Range Research Laboratory 
indicated that germination may be increased to more than 
90 % when seed is scarified using a five-minute treatment 
 

in 98 % concentrated sulfuric acid.  Germination was also 
improved when seeds were scarified with sand paper.  
Additional studies are underway to examine seed 
treatments and seeding methods to improve germination 
and seedling establishment in Searls’ prairie clover.  
Rhizobial strains that inoculate other perennial Dalea 
species (D. purpurea and D. candida) may be effective at 
nodulating D. searlsiae, but has not been evaluated.  For 
details regarding inoculation of legumes refer to Miller et 
al. 2010. 
 
The recommended full seeding drill rate is 7 pounds Pure 
Live Seed (PLS) per acre.  When used as a component of 
a seed mix, adjust the rate to the percentage of the seed 
mix desired.  If broadcast seeding, double the 
recommended seeding rate.  Seedbed should be weed free 
and firm. Place seed to a depth of 1/4-1/2 inch with press 
wheels to ensure good seed-to-soil contact.  Dormant 
seeding would likely help overcome at least some seed 
hardness. 

Breeding Biology and Pollination 
Cane et al. (2011) studied the breeding biology of Searls‘ 
prairie clover and found that this species exhibited limited 
self-compatibility and was primarily out crossing.  From 
847 flowering plants of Searls’ and western prairie clover 
(D. ornata) at six native rangeland sites, Cane et al. 
(2011) collected 114 bees representing 22 species.  The 
prevalent bees were from the genera Athidium, Bombus, 
Colletes, Eucera and Melissodes. 
 
Management 
Seedlings of Searls' prairie clover should be protected 
from grazing until plants are well established.  Follow 
standard grazing practices that maintain the productivity 
and longevity of the stand. 
 
The USDA-ARS Poisonous Plant Research Laboratory 
and the Utah Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory have 
analyzed collections of Searls’ prairie clover for toxicity.  
All samples had non-detectable levels of swainsonine and 
nitrotoxins and selenium contents that are well below 
levels of concern for grazing animals. 

Pests and Potential Problems 
Similar to western prairie clover, it would be expected 
that seed beetles (Acanthoscelides oregonensis Johnson 
(Chrysomelidae: Bruchinae) and Apion (Pseudapion) 
amaurum Kissinger (Brentidae: Apioninae) might infest 
seed and need to be excluded or controlled to 
productively produce seed of Searls’ prairie clover (Cane 
et al. 2011). 

Environmental Concerns 
There are no known environmental concerns with Searls’ 
prairie clover.  
 

 

 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
At present, there are no releases of Searls’ prairie clover. 
 
Twenty seed collections of Searls’ prairie clover from 
Utah and Nevada were established in northern Utah for 
phenotypic evaluation by the USDA-ARS Forage and 
Range Research Laboratory (Bhattarai et al. 2011).  
Significant variation was detected among the collections 
for all traits measured in two common gardens.  Biomass-
related traits were closely associated with collection-site 
precipitation.  Collections from northwestern Utah were 
genetically differentiated from those of southern Utah and 
Nevada by amplified fragment length polymorphism 
(AFLP) markers.  Strong isolation by distance was 
observed between collections suggesting that genetic drift 
and gene flow are major factors in determining population 
structure in this species. As a result, two regional seed 
sources are being developed for Searls’ prairie clover, one 
from northwestern Utah and the other from eastern 
Nevada and southern Utah. 

References 
Barneby, R.C. 1977. Daleae imagines.  Memoirs of the 

New York Botanical Garden 27: 232-234. 

Bhattarai, K., B.S. Bushman, D.A. Johnson, and J.G. 

Carman.  2011.  Searls prairie clover (Dalea 
searlsiae) for rangeland revegetation: Phenotypic and 
genetic evaluations.  Crop Science 51: 716-727. 

Cane, J.H., M. Weber, and S. Miller.  2011.  Breeding 

biologies, pollinators and seed beetles of two prairie 
clovers, Dalea ornata and D. searlsiae (Fabaceae: 
Amorpheae), from the Intermountain West USA.  
Western North American Naturalist (submitted). 

Cronquist, A., A. H. Holmgren, N. H.  Holmgren, J. L. 

Reveal, and P.K. Holmgren. 1989. Vascular plants of 
the Intermountain West. U. S. A. New York 
Botanical Garden, Bronx, NY. 

Miller, R., J. Kaiser, and D. Ogle. 2010. Legume 

Inoculation.  USDA-NRCS, Boise, ID.  TN 26 5 p. 

Tiehm, A. 1985.  Fanny Searls (1851-1939). Brittonia 37: 

41-43. 

Welsh, S.L., N.D. Atwood, S. Goodrich, and L.C. Higgins 
(eds.).  2008.  A Utah Flora. Fourth Edition, Revised. 
Brigham Young University, Provo, UT. 

Prepared By  
Loren St. John, Derek Tilley 
USDA-NRCS Plant Materials Center 
Aberdeen, Idaho 
 
Dan Ogle 
USDA-NRCS, Boise, Idaho 
 
Doug Johnson, Shaun Bushman  
USDA-ARS FRRL 
Logan, Utah 

Citation 
St. John, L, Tilley, D., Ogle, D. Johnson, D., Bushman, S. 
2011. Plant guide for Searls’ prairie clover (Dalea 
searlsiae). USDA-Natural Resources Conservation 
Service, Plant Materials Center, Aberdeen, Idaho 83210 
and USDA-Agricultural Research Service, Forage and 
Range Research Laboratory, Logan, Utah 84322. 

Published July 2011 

Edited: [18 Apr2011ls; 24May2011dt; 24May2011dgo; 
23May2011dj; 24May2011sb; 1june2011jab; 
9June2011ls] 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

