PANICLEDLEAF  
TICKTREFOIL 

Desmodium paniculatum (L.) DC. 

Plant Symbol = DEPA6 

Contributed by: USDA, NRCS, Rose Lake Plant 
Materials Center and Norman Berg National Plant 
Materials Center. 

 

 

Plant Guide

species of thrips, aphids, moth caterpillars, and stinkbugs.  
The  seeds  are  eaten  by  some  upland  game  birds 
(Bobwhite Quail, Wild Turkey) and small rodents (White-
Footed Mouse, Deer Mouse), while the foliage is readily 
eaten by White-Tailed Deer and other hoofed mammalian 
herbivores.  The  Cottontail  Rabbit  also  consumes  the 
foliage (Hilty, 2013b). 

Panicledleaf ticktrefoil Status 
Please  consult  the  PLANTS  Web  site  and  your  State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status  (e.g. 
threatened  or  endangered  species,  state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

in 

to 

relation 

Description 
Panicledleaf  ticktrefoil  is  a  native,  perennial,  wildflower 
that  grows  up  to  4  feet  tall  (USDA,  2013).  The  genus 
Desmodium: originates from Greek meaning "long branch 
or chain," probably from the shape and attachment of the 
seedpods.  The taxonomy of this species is quite variable 
with  several  varieties  based  on  leaflet  size  and  shape 
(Voss,  1985).    The  stems  are  light  green  and  usually 
hairless.    Alternate  compound  leaves  occur  at  intervals 
along  the  stems;  they  are  trifoliate  and  their  leaflets  are 
extended  horizontally 
the  ground.  
Individual  leaflets  are  up  to  3½  inches  long  and  ¾  inch 
wide.    The  petioles  of  the  compound  leaves  are  up  to  2 
inches long.  The upper stems terminate in either racemes 
or narrow panicles of flowers.  Individual flowers are ¼  
inch long and have a typical pea-like structure.  The petals 
are  pink  to  purple.    The  blooming  period  occurs  from 
mid-summer to early fall and lasts about 1 – 1 ½ months.  
Seeds form in seed pots (flat loments) that are about ½ - 1 
½ inches long.  Each seed pod consists of 2 – 6 rounded 
segments  with  a  single  seed  in  each  segment.    This 
wildflower 
that  prefers  some 
disturbance  from  wildfires,  selective  logging,  and  others 
causes  (Hilty,  2013b).   The  sticky  seedpods  cling  to  the 
fur of animals and the clothing of humans and are carried 
to new locations (USDA, 1961). 

is  a  pioneer  species 

Ethnobotany 
The Houma Indians of Louisiana used an infusion of the 
roots in whiskey to treat weakness and cramps (Moerman, 
1988; Speck, 1941). 

Distribution:   
Its range is from New England to Minnesota and from 
Florida to Texas.  It is common throughout the Midwest 
States (USDA, 2013). 
For current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
  
 

Photo by Rick Mark rick.mark@comcast.net image used with permission 

 

Alternate Names 
Panicled ticktrefoil 

include 

Uses 
Panicledleaf ticktrefoil attracts birds and is a grazing and 
browsing  plant  for  livestock  and  mammalian  wildlife 
(USDA, 2013).  Panicledleaf ticktrefoil enriches the  soil 
through nitrogen fixation (Shockley et al., 2011).  Long-
tongued  bumblebees  (Bombus  impatiens  and  Bombus 
pensylvanica) collect pollen from the flowers.  Other long 
tongued  bee  pollinators 
leaf-cutting  bees 
(Megachile  brevis  brevis,  Megachile  mendica,  and 
Megachile  petulans),  and  digger  bees 
(Melissodes 
bimaculata  bimaculata).  Short  tongued  bee  pollinators 
include: sweat bees (Nomia nortoni nortoni) and Campus 
bees  (Calliopsis  andreniformis)  (Hilty,  2013a).  The 
caterpillars of several skippers feed on the leaves: Hoary 
Edge 
lyciades),  Silver-Spotted  Skipper 
(Epargyreus  clarus),  Southern  Cloudywing  (Thorybes 
bathyllus), and Northern Cloudywing (Thorybes pylades).  
The  caterpillars  of  the  butterfly  Eastern  Tailed  Blue 
(Everes  comyntas)  also  feed  on  the  foliage,  while  the 
caterpillars  of  the  butterfly  Gray  Hairstreak  (Strymon 
melinus) eat the flowers and developing seedpods. Other 
insect  feeders  include  many  kinds  of  beetles,  and  some 

(Achalarus 

 

Adaptation 
This ticktrefoil prefers partial sun and dry to slightly dry 
conditions.    It  usually  grows  in  soil  that  contains  loam, 
clay-loam, or some  kinds of rocky  material.  Its habitats 
include  savannas,  rocky  upland  forest,  edges  of  wooded 
areas, thickets, and limestone glades (Hilty, 2013b). 

Establishment 
A  clean,  firm  seedbed  is  essential  for  establishing 
panickledleaf ticktrefoil.  A good seedbed can be prepared 
by  disking  and  harrowing,  following  by  cultipacking.  
Planting into no-till conditions can be effective provided 
weeds  are  controlled  and  residue  is  managed  prior  to 
planting.    Good  seed-to-soil  contact  is  important  for 
germination  and  establishment  (USDA,  2008).    Seed  is 
variable in size and large seeds have a higher germination 
percentage than do small seeds (Wulff, 1986).   
 
The seedbed should be firm enough to allow the seed to 
be planted ⅛ to ¼ inch deep (USDA, 2008).  Cultipacker 
seeders  and  band  seeders  followed  by  press  wheels  or  a 
cultipacker help ensure shallow seed placement and good 
seed-to-soil  contact.    Apply  phosphorus  and  potassium 
fertilizer  only  as  recommended  by  a  soil  test  (USDA, 
2008).    Nitrogen  fertilizer  is  not  recommended  since 
panicledleaf 
the 
atmosphere. 
 
Inoculating  seeds  with  Rhizobium  before  planting  is 
recommended (Shockley et al., 2011).  Consult inoculant 
supplier  for  recommendations  on  specific  Rhizobium 
strains for panicledleaf ticktrefoil.  
 
Seeding of panicledleaf ticktrefoil should be as part of a 
wildflower, legume, and grass mix developed to meet the 
objective  of  the  planting.    Seed  can  be  planted  in  the 
spring or early fall.  Early Fall seeding may be preferrable 
for  longer  establishment  period  prior  to  potentially  hot 
and  dry  summer  conditions.    If  fall  planting  is  not 
possible due to weather, store seed dry at 34 – 36º F and 
plant in the spring.   

fixes  nitrogen 

ticktrefoil 

from 

Management 
Reduce weed competition by mowing at a height that will 
not  affect  the  ticktrefoil  seedlings.    For  grassy  weed 
control  use  a  grass  herbicide  and 
label 
recommendation, as weed control will encourage a good       
stand.    Note:    Some  herbicide  products  may  not  be 
registered on this legume species in your state.  

follow 

Pests and Potential Problems 
Japanese beetle adults feed on flowers and leaves.  
White  mold  has  been  observed  on  some  Desmodium 
species  (Observations  at  the  Rose  Lake  Plant  Materials 
Center, East Lansing, Michigan).  

Environmental Concerns 
No concerns at this time. 

 

 

Control 
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 
area  and  how  to  use  it  safely.    Always  read  label  and 
safety instructions for each control method. 

seed 

produces 

ticktrefoil 

Seeds and Plant Production 
Panicledleaf 
annually.  
Protection  from  deer  browse  may  be  needed  to  ensure 
seed production.  Seed pods stay attached to the stem late 
into the fall, so shattering loss not a big concern.   Harvest 
seeds  by  hand  or  with  a  combine  harvester  when  seed 
pods and stems are brown and dry.  A plant desiccant may 
be  used  to  aid  plant  dry  down.    Seed  may  or  may  not 
separate from the seed pod during harvest.  Seeds can be 
separated from the pod using a brush separator, hammer 
mill,  or  similar  equipment.    Seed  can  be  further  cleaned 
using a fanning mill (Observations at the Rose Lake Plant 
Materials Center, East Lansing, MI). 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
Grant Germplasm panicledleaf ticktrefoil is a tested class 
release from the Rose Lake Plant Materials Center in East 
Lansing, Michigan.  It was collected from native stands in 
Grant County, Wisconsin and released in 2006.  
 
References 
Hilty, J. Editor.  2013a. Insect Visitors of Illinois           

Wildflowers.  World Wide Web electronic 
publication.  Illinoiswildflowers.info, version 
(01/2013) Verified 2/13/2013. 

Hilty, J. Editor.  2013b.  Panicled Tick Trefoil 

(Desmodium paniculatum). World Wide Web 
electronic publication.  Illinois 
wildflowers.info/savanna/plants/pn_tktrefoil.htm. 
Verified 2/13/2013. 

Moerman,  D.E.,  1988.    Native  American  Ethnobotany.   

Timber Press Inc., Portland, OR.  927 pp. 

Shockley, F. W. R. L. McGraw, and H. E. Garret. 2011. 
Growth  and  Nutrient  Concentrations  of  two  Native 
Forage  Legume  with  Rhizobium  and  Mycorrhiza  in 
Missouri,  USA.    Agroforestry  Systems  60:    137  – 
142. 

  Speck, F.G., 1941.  A list of Curatives Obtained from the 
Houma Indians of Louisiana.  Primitive Man 14: 49-
75. 

USDA.    1961.    Seeds.    The  Yearbook  of  Agriculture.  

U.S. Printing Office. Washington, DC.  591 pp.  

     USDA-NRCS. 2008. Conservation Practice Standard 327 
–  Conservation  Cover.    NRCS-MI  Field  Operations 
Technical Guide.  

        USDA 2013. PLANTS Database. www.plants.usda.gov.   

Verified 2/13/2013. 

Voss, E. G. 1985.  Michigan Flora.  Part II Dicots.  
       University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI.  724 pp. 
Wulff,  R.D.  1986.    Seed  size  variation  in  Desmodium 
paniculatum,  II.    Effects  on  seedling  growth  and 
physiological performance.  J. Ecol. 74, 99-114. 

 

 

Prepared By:  
USDA-NRCS Rose Lake Plant Materials Center, East 
Lansing, Michigan. 

Citation 
Leif,  J,  and  Belt,  S.  2013.   Plant  Guide  for  Panicledleaf 
ticktrefoil  (Desmodium  paniculatum),  USDA-Natural 
Resources  Conservation  Service,  Rose  Lake  Plant 
Materials  Center,  East  Lansing,  Michigan,    48823  and 
USDA-Natural  Resources  Conservation  Service  Norman 
Berg  National  Plant  Materials  Center,  Beltsville, 
Maryland, 20705. 

Published: March 2013 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact  your  local  NRCS  field  office  or  Conservation 
District  <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>,  and  visit 
the 
PLANTS  Web  site  <http://plants.usda.gov>  or  the  Plant 
Materials 
<http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov>. 

Program  Web 

site 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

