SOUTHEASTERN 

WILDRYE 

Elymus glabriflorus (Vasey ex 
L.H. Dewey) Scribn & C.R. Ball 

Plant Symbol = ELGL3 

Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Norman A. Berg National 
Plant Materials Center 

 

Photo by Sara Tangren 

Alternative Scientific Names 
Elymus australis 
Elymus glabriflorus var. australis 
Elymus glabriflorus var. glabriflorus 
Elymus virginicus var. australis 
Elymus virginicus var. glabriflorus 
Elymus virginicus f. australis 

Uses 
Southeastern wildrye is a native, robust, upright, cool-
season grass that tolerates a variety of soils and cultural 
conditions.  It is relatively short-lived and does not 
tolerate frequent mowing.  It is compatible with native 
warm-season grasses and wildflowers in seed mixes.  
Beneficial characteristics include rapid and high 
germination rates; long-term seed viability; suitability for 
slope, riparian and critical area stabilization; and tolerance 
of well-drained sandy to waterlogged soils.  Southeastern 
wildrye is a tool for private and public land managers 

 

 

 

Plant Guide

developing plans that combine the benefits of wildlife 
habitat with production agriculture. 
 
Restoration and Soil Stabilization: The use of native 
grasses for revegetation has increased with the increased 
availability of plant material and the recognition that 
native species are important in the restoration of 
biological diversity (Knapp and Rice, 1996).  
Southeastern wildrye seed germinates quickly and in high 
percentages (70%) making it useful for roadsides, 
stabilization of slopes and other highly erodible areas. 
 
Public awareness of the health of the Chesapeake Bay and 
Mississippi River Basin watersheds has increased the 
desire to reduce the environmental impacts from synthetic 
inputs.  One of southeastern wildrye’s strongest attributes 
is that it requires little or no fertilization for establishment 
and maintenance; making it ideal for restoration plans 
seeking to protect water quality. 
 
The Great Smoky Mountains National Park primarily uses 
grasses to stabilize steep roadsides.  Effective slope 
stabilization is achieved by hydro-seeding southeastern 
wildrye, hard fescue (Festuca brevipila), Chewing’s 
fescue [Festuca rubra L. ssp. fallax (Thuill.) Nyman], red 
fescue (Festuca rubra), and annual ryegrass (1TLolium 
multiflorum) with1T other native warm season grasses and 
wildflowers at the rate of 260 lbs of seed of per acre in the 
early autumn or spring.  Southeastern wildrye provides 
winter soil coverage when many other plants are dormant.  
Seed stored under optimal conditions (less than 50º F and 
30% relative humidity) remains highly viable for up to 10 
years (Observations at the National Plant Materials 
Center, Beltsville, MD). 
 
A 1:1:1 seed mix of the wildryes Canada, Virginia and 
riverbank seeded (20 lbs. /acre) with fringed bromegrass 
(Bromus ciliatus) (9 lbs. /acre) and fowl bentgrass (Poa 
palustris) (0.5 lbs. /acre) provides quick dense cover for 
erosion control on up to a 2% grade (Salon 2006).  
Southeastern wildrye has the potential to function 
similarly to the other wildryes. 
 
Wildlife: Various beetles and butterfly larvae feed upon 
members of the genus and spiders commonly build webs 
among the spikelets.  Phorbia flies eat patches of fungi 
spreading the beneficial fungal spores from one grass to 
the next.  Ground-dwelling sparrows consume wildrye 
seed.  As the plant matures and lodges (fall over), 
excellent habitat is created for ground-nesting birds such 
as bobwhite quail.  Deer do not graze on wildrye, as 
grasses are not a primary food. They will eat grass when it 
is young and tender, but tend to avoid it after it is older 
unless it is their only choice for food.   

Forage:  Southeastern wildrye is a good cool-season 
forage, with high crude protein (13-19%), low neutral 
detergent fiber (45-55%), and low acid detergent fiber 
(25-35%) on unfertilized stands (Rushing 2012). Dry 
matter yields of more than 3 tons/acre can be achieved. 
Rotational grazing is recommended in order to maintain 
forage quality (harvest or graze every 20-30 days) and 
quantity.  High innate nutritional content makes 
southeastern wildrye a great cool-season option for those 
interested in a year-round grazing system using only 
native species. 

Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Description 
General:  Originally described as a variety of Canada 
wildrye, southeastern wildrye at times has been classified 
as a variety of Virginia wildrye (e.g. Hitchcock 1951), but 
more recently is recognized as a distinct species 
(Barkworth et al. 2007).  Southeastern wildrye is a 4 foot 
tall, cool season, clump-forming, perennial grass.  As with 
its domestic relatives, wheat and rye, seeds are borne in 
terminal spikes (ears).   
 

 

Figure 1:  Comparison of Virginia and southeastern wildrye spikes.  
Photo by Sara Tangren. 
 
Figure 1 shows the Virginia wildrye spikes (left), narrow 
(up to 1 inch) with the spikelets appressed tightly along 
the central axis.  The spikes are often enclosed in the 
uppermost leaf.  Southeastern wildrye spikes (right) are 
wide (up to 2 inches) with the spikelets held at a more 

open angle from the central axis of the spike.  The long 
awns also contribute to the width and overall appearance 
of the spike.  Southeastern wildrye spikes are usually 
exserted well beyond the uppermost leaf. 
 
Mature, upright, spikes are fully emerged above the 
foliage, 1 to 2 inches wide, and up to 8 inches long.  
Southeastern wildrye flowers from May through July and 
is largely self- pollinated and occasionally pollinated by 
wind.  Flowering usually occurs two to four weeks after 
Virginia wildrye (Barkworth 2007).  The evenly 
distributed, dull green leaves are about one-third to two-
thirds of an inch wide.  .  Southeastern wildrye increases 
in width by tillers, it does not spread from rhizomes, and 
the root system is fibrous.  Fibrous roots attach firmly to 
soil particles, making them especially effective in 
preventing soil erosion.  
  

 

 
Figure 2:  Comparison of Virginia and southeastern wildrye 
spikelets.  Photo by Sara Tangren. 
 
Figure 2 shows the Virginia wildrye spikelets (left), 
shorter (0.4 to 1.0 inches) than southeastern wildrye 
spikelets (right, 0.9 to 1.7 inches). 
 
Southeastern wildrye is most closely related to early and 
Virginia wildryes (Elymus macgregorii and Elymus 
virginicus) and occasionally hybridizes with them 
(Barkworth, 2007)   
 

 

 

Distribution:  

 Southeastern wildrye distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS  
 Database  

Southeastern wildrye has a very broad distribution range 
and wide adaptability.  For current distribution, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Habitat:  Southeastern wildrye can be found in woodland 
edges, open woods, temporary and permanent meadows, 
thickets and open grasslands, sometimes spreading into 
old fields and roadsides (Barkworth 2007).   
Adaptation 
Southeastern wildrye is tolerant of a wide range of 
conditions from moist to dry soil, full sun to part shade, 
(plants grown in full sunlight tend to be more robust than 
those grown in shade) coarse to fine substrate, early 
successional to mature meadow communities, and acid to 
neutral soil pH’s. 
Establishment 
Seed Bed Preparation:  
To ensure successful establishment, make sure moderate 
to high levels of potassium and phosphorous are present 
in the soil (root and crown development).  Establishment 
year nitrogen can promote weed competition; therefore, 
nitrogen applications should not be made until the 
following year, once plants have matured.   Refer to the 
test recommendations prior to establishment to address 
any required amendments. 
In order to limit weed pressure, allow weeds to germinate 
and grow to the 2 – 4 leaf stage before treatment with a 
non-selective herbicide such as glyphosate.  If the field 
has been fallow and heavy weed pressure is anticipated it 
may be necessary to repeat this step multiple times.  
Prepare a clean firm, weed free seedbed by disking, 
harrowing, and firming the seedbed with a cultipacker or 
roller prior to establishment.   
 
 
 

 

 

o

o

PF.  

Seed Pre-treatment (stratification): 
Seed viability and longevity are maximized by cold 
PF and 30% relative humidity).  Seed stored 
storage (<50P
this way will germinate within 7 to 10 days of exposure to 
moisture.  More rapid uniform germination can be 
promoted with 7 days of cold, moist stratification.  
Extended cold, moist stratification will lead to premature 
germination (Observations at the National Plant Materials 
Center, Beltsville, MD). 
 
Sowing: 
Wildrye seeds can be sown at any time of the year but 
germination and growth will only occur during cool, 
moist weather.  Early fall establishment is recommended, 
however spring sowing can be successful if early enough 
in the season to avoid heat stress.  Fall establishment will 
allow for root development prior to the winter, and 
vernalization for spring seed germination.  Optimum soil 
temperatures for sowing are between 60-68P
Southeastern wildrye should be planted at a rate of 20 lbs 
of pure live seed (PLS) per acre drilled.  Broadcasting 
rates are higher (30 lbs/A) and should be cultipacked 
following sowing to ensure contact between seed and soil.  
Seed should be sown ¼ to ½ inch deep, rain or irrigation 
may be used to firm the seedbed and is essential for 
germination.  When spring sown, plants are capable of 
reaching 5 inches tall within 30 days of germination.  
Plants reach full height and reproductive maturity in their 
first year.   
 
Seed Harvest: Seed can be collected from mature plants 
when the inflorescence is no longer green (~15% 
moisture).  In Maryland this occurs early to mid 
September.  Prior to any mechanical seed cleaning, dry in 
a cool area (at temperatures less than 70º F) for 2-4 
weeks.  Paper bags are ideal for small lots; large lots 
should be spread on a tarp.  A fan will greatly accelerate 
this process. 
 
Seed Cleaning:  The type of equipment to be used to 
broadcast the seed determines the type of cleaning. The 
long awns of southeastern wildrye (figure 2) may clog 
(bridge) the tubes of most no-till drills and planters.  The 
time that it takes for awn removal is variable and should 
be checked closely until the desired amount of awn 
removal is reached.  Planting rates should be adjusted 
(based on pure live seed – PLS) to accommodate reduced 
germination when establishing debearded southeastern 
wildrye.  The long awns will not interfere with broadcast 
by hand or with hydro seeding, so de bearding is not 
necessary.  Use a three screen seed cleaner to separate 
debearded seed from chaff and weed seed.   
 
Management 
Fall-season seedling growth and vigor can be fairly slow 
to moderate.  Following a fall planting, above-ground 
biomass will not significantly accumulate until the 
following spring.  However, upon successful 
establishment and proper management, plants will begin 

to tiller and develop crowns for regeneration and 
carbohydrate storage.   
 
Southeastern wildrye can withstand light grazing.  
Rotational grazing is recommended for preservation of 
mature stands.  Plants should not be defoliated (clipped or 
grazed) lower than 5 to 6 inches, in order to prevent weed 
competition and promote vegetative growth (more 
nutritious and greater palatability).  Defoliation should 
occur every 20 to 30 days in order to maintain high forage 
quality and quantity.  If haying, harvest prior to jointing 
(seed head development) to capture highest forage 
quality.  One harvest can be expected, as summer heat 
forces the plants into dormancy. 
 
Plants are nitrogen responsive, therefore traditional 
approaches for hay management in regards to nutrient 
removal can be applied to southeastern wildrye.   
 
Herbicide may be necessary for seed production or 
roadside situations.  Oryzalin is an effective broad 
spectrum pre-emergent herbicide for established stands.  
Broadleaf weeds can be controlled with 2, 4,-D amine, 
MCPP-p, dicamba, or clopyralid.  Yellow nut sedge can 
be a stubborn weed in moist soils, halosulfuron provides 
good control.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Diseases:  Plants established after a glyphosate treatment 
may develop fusarium head blight (Figure 3), a condition 
which affects seed quality but not foliage (Fernandez 
2005).   

Figure 3: Fusarium Head Blight symptoms on seed.  Photo by Sara 
Tangren. 

 

Rust (Puccinia spp.) has been observed on leaves late in 
the season, after seed heads have emerged and matured.   

 
 

 

 

Environmental Concerns 
The entire tribe of grasses, of which southeastern wildrye 
is a part, is prone to hybridize and form new species, 
some of which are fertile and some are not.  The 
ecological consequences of moving Elymus species 
outside their natural range are difficult to forecast.   
 
Control 
The authors have not observed any incidence of 
southeastern wildrye becoming invasive.  Please contact 
your local agricultural extension specialist or county weed 
specialist to learn what works best in your area and how 
to use it safely.  Always read label and safety instructions 
for each control method.  Trade names and control 
measures appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, and 
other products may be equally effective. 

References 
Barkworth, M.E., J.J.N. Campbell & B. Salomon (2006).  

Elymus L.  In: Flora North America Editorial 
Committee (Eds.).  Flora of North America North of 
Mexico Vol. 24: 288-343.  Magnoliophyta: 
Commelinidae (in part) Poaceae, part 1. Oxford 
University Press, New York.  Manuscript.  
www. 3Therbarium.usu.edu/webmanual3T (accessed on 
5/01/09). 

Bultman, T., J. White, T. Bowdish, A. Welch and J. 

Johnston, 1995. Mutualistic Transfer of Epichloë 
Spermatia by Phorbia Flies. Mycologia, 87:2 182-
189. 

Fernandez, M.R., F. Selles, F. Gehld, M. DePauw and 

R.P. Zentner. 2005.  Crop Production Factors 
Associated with Fusarium Head Blight in Spring 
Wheat in Saskatchewan. Crop Sci. 45: 1908–1916 
Knapp, E.E. and K.J. Rice. 1996.  Genetic Structure and 

Gene Flow in Elymus glaucus (blue wildrye):  
Implications for Native Grassland Restoration.  
Restor. Ecol. 4(1): 1-10. 

Rushing, J.B. 2012. Evaluation of wildrye (Elymus spp.) 

as a potential forage and conservation planting for the 
southeastern United States. Mississippi State 
University Library, Mississippi State, MS 39762. 

Sanderson, M.A., R.H. Skinner, J. Kujawski, M/ van der 

Grinten.  2004.  Virginia Wildrye Evaluated as a 
Potential Native Cool-Season Forage in the Northeast 
USA.  Crop Science 44: 1379-1384. 

Salon, P.R and M. van der Grinten.  2007.  Compatibility 

of a mixture of Canada, Virginia and riverbank 
wildrye seeded with seven individual species of 
native and introduced cool season grasses. . The Fifth 
Eastern Native Grass Conference, Harrisburg, PA. 
October 10-13 2006. 1p. 

 
Prepared By:  Shawn Belt, USDA, NRCS Norman A. 
Berg National Plant Materials Center, Brett Rushing 
Mississippi State University, and Sara Tangren.  

 
Citation 
Belt, S., B. Rushing, S. Tangren.  2013.  Plant Guide for 
Southeastern wildrye (Elymus glabriflorus).  USDA-
Natural Resources Conservation Service, Norman A. Berg 
National Plant Materials Center. Beltsville, MD 20705. 

Published March 2013. 
Edited: [29jan2013sb, 28jan2013br, 2feb2013st]    

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at 3TUhttp://www.nrcs.usda.gov/U3T and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at 3TUhttp://plants.usda.gov/U3T or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site 3TUhttp://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.govU3T. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

