 
 

 

Plant Guide

and the development of international travel contributed to 
the plant’s early distribution worldwide. 
 
Wildlife 
The California poppy has limited direct wildlife value, 
comprising less than 5% of small mammal diets and 
providing minor cover for small birds (Martin et al., 
1951). The importance of the species to mammals is 
likely increased in certain resource-limited environments.  
Indirect benefit to other animal species may be substantial 
as insect visitation and overall insect abundance may 
increase relative to the pollen-rich flowers.  This floral 
resource, as a member of a diverse plant community, may 
serve as an important link in the food web.  
 
Pollinators and Beneficial Insects: 
From late February to late September, numerous and 
varied insects are attracted to the vibrant flowers and 
abundant pollen of the California poppy.  The species is 
an obligate out-crosser, relying upon the pollination 
services of insects for reproductive success (Beatty, 1936; 
Cook, 1962) though reports of sterile plants have been 
recorded (Wright 1979). Common pollinators include 
bumble bees (Apidae), sweat bees (Halictidae), mining 
bees (Andrenidae) and European honey bees (Apidae: 
Apis mellifera).  There is also evidence that up to five 
specialist pollinators (oligoleges) of the genus Perdita 
(Apidae) may gather pollen from California poppy and 
perhaps one other plant species, the mariposa lily 
(Calochortus splendens) (Timberlake, 1956).  Other floral 
visitors in pursuit of food or refuge include thrips, hover 
flies, butterflies, minute pirate bugs and beetles (Cook, 
1962).  While incidental transfer of pollen can occur, 
these latter insects are generally not considered significant 
pollinators.  
 
Erosion Control and Revegetation: 
Seeds are used in erosion control mixtures, roadside 
plantings, and in restoration projects in California: 
 
Medicinal: 
Over 30 chemicals and secondary metabolites, many 
unique to the species, have been isolated from the 
California poppy (Duke, 1992; Kalvana et al., 2006).  At 
least two of these, the alkaloids sanguinarine and 
chelerythrine, have generated interest for their anti-
bacterial and cancer treating potential.   
 As with most plant chemicals, especially those derived 
from the poppy family (Papaveraceae), there is an implied 
dose-dependent toxicity. 
 
Caution: California poppy may be toxic when taken 
internally without sufficient preparation. 

CALIFORNIA POPPY  
Eschscholzia californica Cham. 

Plant Symbol = ESCA2 

 

Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Lockeford, California 

 

Figure 1. California poppy in bloom. Photo C. Smith, Lockeford Plant 
Materials Center 

 

Alternate Names 
Common Alternate Names:   
California goldenpoppy  
golden poppy  
flame flower  
copa de oro (cup of gold)  
dedal de oro (thimble of gold) 
 
Scientific Alternate Names:   
Subspecies 
Eschscholzia californica ssp. californica (ESCSC) 
Eschscholzia californica ssp. mexicana (ESCAM) 

Uses 
Horticulture: 
California poppy has been an important gardening plant in 
California and on multiple continents for almost 200 
years.  In 1826, ten years after Chamisso described 
Eschscholzia californica, English collector David 
Douglas collected seeds from a southern Oregon 
population for the Royal Botanical Society of England 
(Beidleman, 2006; McClintock, 1976).  The collection 
would be amongst the first of a number of horticultural 
introductions of California poppy to regions far beyond 
the western United States. The popularity of gardens in 
the Victorian era, the global extent of European influence, 

 

 
Status 
California poppy was proclaimed the official state flower 
of California in 1903.  Please consult the PLANTS web 
site and your local USDA NRCS field office for this 
plant’s current status (e.g. threatened or endangered 
species, state noxious status, and wetland indicator 
values).  

Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation 
if not properly managed.  Please consult with your local 
NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service 
office, state natural resource, or state agriculture 
department regarding its status and use.  Weed 
information is also available from the PLANTS Web site 
at http://plants.usda.gov/.  Please consult the Related Web 
Sites on the Plant Profile for this species for further 
information. 

Description 
General:  California poppy is a flowering herbaceous 
annual to deep-rooted perennial.  It is native to the 
western United States from southern Washington south 
into Baja Sur, and from the Channel Islands and Pacific 
coastline east to the Great Basin and regions of the 
Sonoran Desert (Hickman, 1993). California poppy is one 
of 11 species of the Eschscholzia genus naturally 
occurring in the western United States. 
 
In general, California poppy exhibits a growth form that is 
low-spreading to erect (0.5 – 2 ft) with basal and cauline 
foliage which is generally blue-green (glaucous) in 
appearance.  Leaves are ternate, with three finely divided 
lobes, and are nearly glabrous.  Plants produce upright 
flowers on freely branching stems with four satiny petals, 
colored bright orange to light yellow; flowers may also 
have distinct, darker orange centers.  Within the genera, 
California poppy can be distinguished from the other 
species by the presence of a torus rim, a collar-like 
pedestal at the receptacle measuring from, which is 
unique to the species (Hickman, 1993). Flowers respond 
phototropically to low light levels, closing at night and on 
cloudy days.  Plants with a perennial growth habit can 
produce flowers in the first year (Cook, 1962).  
 
General observations for Eschscholzia californica 
indicate floral induction is a function of growth habit and 
plant age, occurring under optimum long day light 
conditions (day length greater than 12 hours) (Lyons and 
Booze-Daniels, 1986).  Flowering is indeterminate, 
although plants occurring on harsh sites may appear 
determinant in nature due to environmental stress.  In the 
Sacramento Valley of California, perennial forms begin 
flowering in early-March and can flower through mid-
October with small amounts of supplemental irrigation.  
Growth habit (annual or perennial) as well as a number of 

 

 

environmental factors will influence actual bloom period 
and intensity.  
  
Seed capsules are cylindrical in shape and dehisce 
longitudinally from the base when ripe.  The capsules 
dehisce explosively, providing the primary means of seed 
dispersal, ejecting the small seed up to 6 feet from the 
parent plant.  Seeds are spherical with a microsculpted 
surface, gray to gray-brown in color when mature.  Seeds 
number from a few to greater than 100 per capsule.  
 
There are two subspecies currently recognized: 
Eschscholzia californica ssp. californica and E. 
californica ssp. mexicana (USDA ARS, 2010).  The 
subspecies are generally distinguished by seedling 
cotyledon appearance (Fig. 1), seed dormancy, and the 
development of perennial structures such as taproots 
(Cook, 1962; Clark, 1978).  Perennial plants of ssp. 
californica may also be distinguished by the accumulation 
of dried foliage around the base as older stems and foliage 
are replaced by new growth from the central crown of the 
plant.   
 

 

 
Figure 2 Top, Eschscholzia, californica ssp. mexicana 
with two cotyledons; bottom, E. californica ssp. 
californica with bifid cotyledons. Diagram after C. Clark, 
1978. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Ethnobotany 
The California poppy has cultural significance for many 
indigenous people of the western United States including 
the Luiseno, Cahuilla, Costanoan and Pomo tribes. While 
some tribes consider the plant poisonous, such as the 
Mahuna, most make routine use of the plant, or specific 
parts of the plant, as both a food source and drug.  The 
roots, which generally contain higher levels of alkaloids, 
have been used as sedatives and analgesics (Moerman, 
1998); one reference notes the stupefying effect being 
used to stun companions when gambling (Foster and 
Hobbs, 2002).  The flowers, high in carotenoids and 
somewhat sweet, may be chewed as a gum or candy, 
while the rich pollen of the flowers serves as eye shadow 
or body paint for special occasions. Entire plants have 
been placed under the bed of children to hasten a restful 
sleep (Moerman, 1998).  

Distribution  
California poppy is native to the western United States 
from southern Washington south into Baja Sur, and from 
the Channel Islands and Pacific coastline east to the Great 
Basin and regions of the Sonoran Desert (Hickman, 
1993).   
 
Eschscholzia californica ssp. mexicana is endemic to the 
Sonoran desert region, occurring from eastern California 
to the Organ Mountains of Arizona, and from 
southwestern Utah into the Franklin Mountains of west 
Texas.  It is postulated that the subspecies was isolated 
from the californica subspecies after the last glacial 
period, some 7,800 years ago (Clark, 1978).  Within this 
desert region, the mexicana subspecies has adapted to the 
comparatively low annual precipitation, increased depth 
to ground water, and the duration and variation of extreme 
temperatures by shifting to an annual reproductive 
strategy that favors seed production over taproot 
development.  Seeds germinate with the winter rains and 
shorter day lengths when temperatures are cooler and 
adequate soil moisture is available.  Unlike the californica 
subspecies, mexicana does not form a traditional rosette 
before flowering, but rapidly grows and flowers while 
conditions are optimum.  No variant forms of ssp. 
mexicana have been described within microclimatic 
regions of the subspecies Sonoran range.  
 
The more “typical” and widely distributed California 
poppy, E. californica ssp. californica, occurs over a much 
broader array of habitats including coastal dunes, open 
slopes in redwood forest, arid plains, inland valleys, and 
desert fringes (Clark, 1978).  Unifying environmental 
characteristics for these sites include sun exposure, 
available water (in the form of rainfall, fog drip or ground 
water) and a low to moderate level of competition for 
both sunlight and soil resources. In coastal areas where 
there is nearly year-round available water, E. californica 
ssp. californica are frequently perennial and may not 
enter a pronounced dormancy period if growing 
conditions remain suitable.  When inhabiting arid regions, 

 

 

or in soils with low available water-holding capacity, 
subspecies californica is more likely to be characterized, 
as a summer dormant perennial or annual.  Some 
populations are so consistent in their dormancy cycling 
that they are characterized as facultative annuals, while 
others are obligate annuals.  
Three variants, or forms of E. californica ssp. californica 
are often identified: variant crocea (syn: var. douglasii) is 
a non-coastal perennial plant of medium size with 
dormant seeds. Flowers of this form can vary in color, 
size and number relative to resources and prevailing 
weather over the course of the season (Cook, 1962).  This 
variant is considered adapted to conditions from 
Washington state south through the Central Valley 
regions of California and into southern California.  
Another variant which co-occurs, and may have displaced 
variant crocea in regions of the Sacramento and San 
Joaquin Valley and into southern California, is an annual 
form, variant peninsularis, which also has dormant seeds. 
Few distinctions beyond the variant’s annual life form 
adequately characterize or contrast crocea and 
peninsularis. It should be emphasized that the major 
distinction between E. californica ssp. californica 
perennial and annual growth forms, as described by Cook 
(1962), are the initiation of, and resources expended in the 
development of the root system: annuals tend to have an 
un-thickened and slender tap root, while perennials tend 
to produce a deeper penetrating and much thickened root 
(Cook, 1962). The third variant, var. maritima, is 
described as residing on sand dunes and coastal bluffs 
from San Miguel Island to Monterey Co., California.  
These perennial plants produce multiple small rosettes 
from a large thickened taproot, have a prostrate habit, 
gray foliage and non-dormant seeds (Munz and Keck, 
1968).  A potential fourth form of Eschscholzia 
californica ssp. californica is var. procea, the Kernville 
Poppy.  This variant is unresolved as to whether it is a 
subspecies variant or another species entirely (Hickman, 
1993); the plant grows in the foothills of Sierra Nevada in 
California. 
For current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Habitat:   
Other herbaceous plants which co-occur in native stands 
of subspecies californica include those associated with 
grassland and oak savanna in California, such as lupines 
(Lupinus spp.), clovers (Trifolium spp.), fringe pods 
(Thysanocarpus sp.), Lomatium (Lomatium sp.), and 
yarrow (Achillea millefolium ).  Notable for the desert 
adapted annual ssp. mexicana are annual lupines, 
Mariposa lily (Calochortus concolor), larkspur 
(Delphinium hansenii), and clarkia (Clarkia spp.) 
(CalFlora, 2010).  

Adaptation 
Within its historical range, California poppy occurs across 
a number of habitats including coastal, valley, foothill and 
desert regions, at elevations below 7000 ft (Hickman, 

1993).  California poppy establishes well on marginal 
disturbed sites, but populations can be expected to decline 
in areas where competition for light and water becomes 
intense (Ratcliff et al., 1972), yet, what the species lacks 
in competitive ability, it regains in adaptive ability (Leger 
and Rice, 2003, 2007).  In general, the species is capable 
of recovering from freeze events, as well as tolerating 
high temperatures, drought, variable precipitation 
regimes, and a wide range of soil textures, chemistries, 
and levels of fertility (Hickman, 1993; Munz and Keck, 
1968; Ratcliff et al., 1972; McCully et al., 2004). The 
ability of this species to colonize varied environs of 
moderate to low competition contributes to success of the 
species as a horticultural plant as well as to its weediness 
in regions well beyond its natural range (Randall, 2007; 
Kirkpatrick, 1998; Leger and Rice, 2003, 2007).  

Establishment 
Seed Source Considerations: 
Selection of varieties for urban and garden plantings 
should be made with consideration to the local climate, 
soil or potting media, and whether the planting will 
receive supplemental irrigation.  For urban areas, planting 
objective, floral qualities, and the price of seed are often 
the main factors in selecting a seed source.  
Successful natural area plantings depend on proper site 
preparation and the selection of adapted plant materials, 
i.e. seed from local populations or from populations with 
similar climate, soil texture and chemistry.  In general, 
annual growth forms of California poppy may be better 
suited to short-term or interim groundcover applications, 
especially on arid sites with shallow or sandy soils, 
provided that a minimum level of precipitation is received 
during the critical winter growing season.  Perennial 
forms are recommended for sites with moderate to deep 
soils (>18”) and good drainage which allows for healthy 
tap root development.  Evergreen perennial forms may 
persist best in coast environments and in areas where 
moisture stress is minimized. 
 
The production history and identification of the origins of 
seed source are important considerations for restoration of 
natural areas, augmentation plantings, or if seeding areas 
are adjacent to native stands of poppy.  Because of the 
physiological uniformity achieved in the horticultural 
breeding process, varietal releases may be ill-adapted to 
less managed settings.   Non-varietal seed may be 
available as various types or classes of pre-variety 
germplasm such as “sourced identified”, “selected”, 
“tested” class germplasm.  For current information on the 
seed certification programs and agencies please consult 
your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension 
Service office, state natural resource, or state agriculture 
department.  Wildland collected seed is also an option, 
though non-varietal agronomically cultivated seed can 
often be produced more economically than wild collected 
seed, and therefore greater quantities are made available 
for revegetation efforts.  
 

 

 

Additional consideration may be warranted for plantings 
near historical populations since annual and perennial 
forms of California poppy readily hybridize as they are 
both considered obligate outcrossing plants and share 
common pollinators (Cook, 1962).  In order to conserve 
genetic integrity within and among populations, the 
introduction of distant populations into historical 
populations or to areas where subspecies overlap is 
discouraged until more information is known. 
 
Seed Dormancy: 
Through the domestication process and the selection of 
horticultural traits, most complex seed dormancy 
requirements for garden variety California poppy have 
been reduced or eliminated.  Domesticated California 
poppy seed germinated consistently, with little regard to 
treatment, except for high-heat treatments which have 
been shown to harm the seeds from most populations 
tested (Montalvo et al., 2002b).  Any remaining seed 
dormancy can generally be overcome by sowing seeds in 
the fall as day-length decreases in locations with mild 
winters, or seeds may be sown in early spring in areas 
with harsh winters. 
 
In contrast to horticultural varieties, seeds from wild 
California poppy populations often retain the seed 
dormancy characteristics correlated to the environmental 
conditions to which they have adapted.  This is true for 
many wild populations, both annual and perennial, 
whether increased under agronomic conditions or 
wildland collected. In germination trials on southern 
California populations of E. californica ssp. californica, 
year of harvest affected dormancy in wild annual 
populations more than wild perennial forms, but seed 
dormancy was not significantly different after two years 
of storage (Montalvo et al, 2002b).  For all wild 
populations included in the study, dormant seed treated 
with smoke increased mean germination rates above 
untreated dormant controls, though populations differed 
substantially in response to treatment and in baseline 
dormancy.  The smoke treatments did not appear to be as 
significant for some populations aged more than 8 months 
before treatment.  For some populations, mean 
germination of dormant seed was improved in 10 out of 
13 trials with the addition of a cold moist stratification 
period following a dry smoke treatment (Montalvo et al, 
2002b).  
 
Wildland or natural area plantings should occur in the fall 
for most Pacific regions, including deserts, to allow for 
exposure to natural precipitation, light, and temperature 
conditions which favor dormancy release mechanisms.  
Pre-treatment of seed prior to planting is generally not 
recommended for wildland reestablishment, as seed 
dormancy will be naturally broken if adapted seed is sown 
at the appropriate time.  
 
Agronomic seed increase plots are best established in the 
fall, though seed pre-treatment may need to start well in 

advance of planting.  The more similar the seed increase 
fields are to the original wildland collection site, the less 
effort may be involved in pre-treating seed to break 
dormancy.  In an agronomic seed increase planting, 
addressing seed dormancy requirements for a given 
population at time of establishment should limit the 
unintentional selection against genes conferring dormancy 
and maximize seed germination rates (Montalvo, 2002b).   
 
Seed may be relatively short-lived under room 
temperature storage, perhaps maintaining viability for 
about five years (Montalvo et al., 2002b).  Seeds stored in 
paper envelopes in a tin box at the California State Seed 
Laboratory dropped to about 50% of initial germination 
rates in years 8 to 10 (Goss, 1937).  More research is 
needed into the optimum seed storage conditions for 
Eschscholzia californica.   
 
Site Preparation and Seeding Rates: 
In general, California poppy grows well in full sun in soil 
with textures ranging from sand to clay loam, but not in 
sites with pooled water, or where soils are saturated or 
excessively moist for extended periods of time, either 
from irrigation or precipitation.  Both subspecies are 
capable of colonizing marginal sites low in fertility, but 
do not compete well with established stands of grasses 
such as annual oat (Avena fatua) and perennial ryegrass 
(Lolium perenne) (Cook, 1962; Kirkpatrick, 1998).  Best 
establishment, either in mixes or solitary stands, is 
achieved on low stubble or clean seedbed sites (Cook, 
1965; Ratcliff et al., 1972).  Further, California poppy 
may establish and respond to supplemental applications of 
nitrate fertilizer and to increased rooting depth provided 
by ripping site prior to seeding; poppy may establish 
poorly on sites with high soil organic matter (Montalvo, 
2002a) 
 
California poppy is successfully and most easily 
established from direct seed application.  Non-dormant 
seed may be surface sown (broadcast) and harrowed to 
cover the seed to approximately 1/8”; the species has also 
been successfully established in hydroseeding mixes 
(Montalvo, 2002b).  If seeding plants from dormant seed 
populations, deeper planting to between ¼ and ½” is more 
successful because light inhibits germination of the small 
dormant seeds (Montalvo, pers.comm.).  If using 
California poppy in a seed mix, seeding rates will depend 
on desired objectives for site.  Recommended broadcast 
rates for solitary stands are 3-4 lbs per acre (Brenzel, 
2007), or 18-24 seeds per square foot.  Rates for other 
seeding methods will vary based on desired objective.   
 
The species is not tolerant of transplantation, unless the 
plug or container plant is very young.   

 
Management 
Once established, many adapted populations become self-
perpetuating, both in terms of reseeding and plant density.  

 

 

Persistence within a site is dictated by the level of 
competition for soil and light resources.  In a Madera 
California field mowed or grazed to unspecified stubble 
height, Ratcliff et al. (1972) attributed an increase in the 
density of poppy to a reduction in competition for light 
from an accumulated mulch layer and a reduction in the 
naturalized annual species ripgut brome (Bromus 
diandrus) and broadleaf filaree (Erodium botrys).  
 

Pests and Potential Problems 
Though California poppy has a number of floral insect 
visitors, there are only a few recorded pests that inflict 
damage to the plant.  Insects that feed on the sap of plants, 
such as thrips, aphids and leafhoppers, and Lepidopteran 
larvae which feed on leaves and flowers, are the most 
commonly encountered pests.  Significant visual 
symptoms of damage, such as leaf stippling in the case of 
leaf hoppers and thrips, or malformed leaves with aphids, 
can be encountered in most plantings, although they are 
often more evident on stressed plants.  Alfalfa looper 
infestation in California poppy has been observed to 
substantially reduce floral counts (Leger, 2007).  In 
addition to causing leaf damage, plant pests are capable of 
vectoring disease.  Of most concern for neighboring crops 
are the phytoplasm aster yellows spread by leafhoppers, 
as well as various complexes of the Tospoviruses tomato 
spotted wilt and impatiens necrotic spot, most notably 
vectored by western flower thrips (Frankliniella 
occidentalis) (Dreistadt, 2001).  Concerned growers 
should rogue suspicious plants as active infections of 
these diseases can produce various symptoms.  
Laboratory analysis of symptomatic plants may be 
considered in situations where the health or productivity 
of economic crops may be jeopardized.  
 
The Papaveraceae family is susceptible to a variety of 
diseases of the roots (Verticillium, Rhizoctonia solani, 
Sclerotinia sclerotiorum), leaves and flowers (leaf spots 
Cercospora and Septoria) (Dreistadt, 2001).  Powdery 
mildew (Erysiphe) and gray mold (Botrytis) are the most 
commonly encountered in California poppy; both are 
generally transient, non-lethal infections of aerial plant 
parts, and plants recover as the environmental conditions 
become less favorable for disease development.  Stand 
reduction from disease may be exacerbated due to abiotic 
conditions, such as prolonged periods of saturated soil, 
over-fertilization, overcrowding and other conditions that 
induce plant stress.  
 
Avoidance of disease is the best strategy: plants require 
good drainage, adequate sunlight (preferably full sun) and 
low to moderate ambient humidity. 

 
Environmental Concerns 
California poppy may be toxic to livestock (USDA, 
2010).  Monitor animal response and behavior for 
potential toxicity in grazing situations where poppy 

densities are high or where other forage resources are 
limited.  Livestock palatability of Eschscholzia sp. as well 
as potency of the plant itself may depend on the growth 
stage of the plant as well as the age and class of animal. 

Control 
California poppy is susceptible to the herbicide active 
ingredients pendimethalin and DCPA, and the active 
ingredients oxyfluorfen, dicamba, and pronamide in post-
emergent applications (Roseberg, 1996).  Please contact 
your local agricultural extension specialist or county weed 
specialist to learn what works best in your area and how 
to use it safely.  Always read label and safety instructions 
for each control method.  Trade names and control 
measures appear in this document only to provide specific 
information.  USDA NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, and 
other products may be equally effective. 

Seeds and Plant Production 
Seed size for the species will vary; for large seeded types, 
there are approximately 270,000 seeds per pound. One 
pound of large-sized seed spread over one acre will result 
in approximately 6 seeds per square foot.  For seed 
production, California poppy is typically grown as an 
annual, regardless of actual (variant-dependent) life 
history, though there are exceptions where production 
fields may be held over for additional years.  The species 
is planted at 3-5 pounds per acre in the fall.  For fields in 
Central California, a single harvest is completed in early 
to mid-spring, depending on the production year and the 
development of the plant.  Plants are swathed when a 
majority of the seed capsules show pronounced 
longitudinal veins, and just begin to change color from 
green to tan.  The plants are field-dried on tarps, then 
either direct combined or the seed is collected from the 
tarps after pods have dried and shattered.  Some growers 
report success using chemicals specifically developed as 
anti-transpirants to slow the moisture loss in seed pods, 
aiding in their retention on the plant.  This production 
method requires the seed be harvested with a combine 
after being swathed.  Seed yield varies between 200-500 
pounds per acre.  Seed is cleaned using standard seed 
cleaning technology. 
 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
California poppy has been actively propagated in the 
horticultural trade for at least 150 years.  In that time, a 
number of traits have been purposely selected such as 
unique flower color, petal shape or petal number (Gould, 
1976).  Such poppies are often available as named 
varieties and are readily available from commercial 
sources.  Germplasm collections and pre-varietal 
germplasm may be available.  Contact your local Natural 
Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil 
Conservation Service) office for more information.  Look 
in the phone book under United States Government.  The 

 

Natural Resources Conservation Service will be listed 
under the subheading “Department of Agriculture.” 
 

References 

J. Hered. 27:330-338 

Beatty, A.V.  1936.  Genetic studies on the California poppy.  

Beidleman, R.G.  2006.  California Frontier Naturalists.  Univ. 

of California Press, Ltd.. London. 

Brenzel, K.N. editor.  2007.  Sunset western garden book. 

Sunset Publishing Inc.  Menlo Park, California. 

Calflora.  2010.  The Calflora Database.  (www.calflora.org. 1 
January 2010). Calflora Database.  Berkeley, CA 94709. 

Clark, C.  1978.  Systematic studies of Eschscholzia 

(Papaveraceae). I. The origins and affinities of E. 
mexicana.  Syst. Bot.  3(4): 374-385 

Cook, S.A.  1962.  Genetic system, variation and adaptation in 

Eschscholzia californica. Evolution.  16(3):278-299. 

Dreistadt, S.H.  2001.  Integrated pest management for 
floriculture and nurseries. Regents of the Univ. of 
California, Division of Agric. and Nat. Resources.  
Oakland, CA. 

Duke, J.A.  1992.  Handbook of phytochemical constituents of 

herbs and other economic plants. Boca Raton, FL. CRC 
Press. [Online database:  http://www.ars-
grin.gov/duke/plants.html.  1 January 2010]. 

Foster, S, and C. Hobbs.  2002. A field guide to western 

medicinal plants and herbs.  Houghton Mifflin Company, 
New York. 

Gould, R.  1976. The California poppy-garden hybrids.  

Pacific Hortic.  37(1):6-8. 

Goss, W. L.  1937, Germination of flower seeds stored for ten 
years in the California State Seed Laboratory. Bulletin of 
the Department of Agriculture, State of California. 
26(3):326-333.  

Hickman, J.C., editor.  1993.  The Jepson manual: higher 

plants of California.  Univ. of California Press, Ltd. Los 
Angeles. 

Kirkpatrick, E.H.  1998.  Factors affecting the success of 

California poppy (Eschscholzia californica) introduced 
into western Washington state.  Northwest Sci.  
72(3):180-189. 

Kalvana, M., J. Chen, F. Lepine, R. Legros and M. Jolicoeur.  

2006.  Analysis of secondary metabolites from 
Eschscholzia californica by high-performance liquid 
chromongraphy.  Phytochemical Analysis.  17:236-242.  
Leger, E.A. and K.J. Rice.  2003.  Invasive California poppy 

(Eschscholzia californica  Cham.) grow larger than native 
individuals under reduced competition.  Ecol. Lett.  
6:257-264. 

Leger, E.A. and K.J. Rice.  2007.  Assessing the speed and 
predictability of local adaptation in invasive California 
poppies (Eschscholzia californica).  J. of Evolutionary 
Biology. 20(3):1090-1103. 

Lyons, R.E. and J.N. Booze-Daniels.  1986.  Characteristics of 
photoperiod response of California poppy.  J. Amer. Soc. 
Hort. Sci. 111(4):593-596. 

 

Martin, A.C., H.S. Zim, and A.L. Nelson.  1951. American 

wildlife and plants: A guide to wildlife food habits. Dover 
Publ., New York.  

McClintock, E.  1976.  The California poppy: A natural 

history.  Pacific Hortic. 37:3-5 

McCully, M.E.; M.J. Canny, and C.X. Huang.  2004.  The 

management of extracellular ice by petioles of frost-
resistant herbaceous plants.  Ann. Bot.  94:665-674.   

Moerman, D.E.  1998.  Native American ethnobotany. Timber 

Press, Portland, Oregon. 

Montalvo, AM, PA McMillan, and EB Allen.  2002a. The 

relative importance of seeding method, soil ripping, and 
soil variables on seeding success. Restoration Ecology. 
Vol 10 1:52-67. 

Montalvo, A.M., L.J. Feist-Alvey and C.E. Koehler.  2002b.  
The effect of fire and cold treatments on seed germnation 
of annual and perennial populations of Eschscholzia 
californica (Papaveraceae) in southern California.  
Madroño.  49(4):207-227.   

Munz, P.A. and D.D. Keck.  1968.  A California flora with 

supplement.  Univ. of California Press, Berkeley. 

Randall, R.  2007.  Summary listing from the global 

compendium of weeds for Eschscholzia californica 
(Papaveraceae).  [Online database: 
http://www.hear.org/gcw/eschscholzia_californica/. 
Updated January 2009} 

Ratcliff, R.D.; S.E. Westfall and R.W. Robarts.  1972.  More 

California poppy in stubble field than in old field.  USDA, 
USFS Res. Note PSW-271.  Pacific Southwest Forest and 
Range Ext. Stn., Berkeley, CA. 

Roseberg, R.J.  1996.  Herbicide tolerance and weed control 

strategies in Lesquerella production.  Ind. Crops and 
Products.  5:133-139.  

Timberlake, P.H.  1956.  A revisional study of the genus 

Perdita F. Smith, with special reference to the fauna of 
the Pacific Coast.  Univ. of California publ. in Entomol.. 
11:247-350. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
USDA, ARS,  National Genetic Resources Program. 

Germplasm Resources Information Network - (GRIN) 
[Online Database:  http://www.ars-grin.gov/cgi-
bin/npgs/html/paper.pl?language=en&chapter=scient 23 
November 2010)]. Natl. Germplasm Resources 
Laboratory, Beltsville, Maryland. 

USDA, NRCS.  2010.  The PLANTS Database (Online 
database: http://plants.usda.gov.  1 January 2010).  
National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, LA 70874-
4490 USA.  

Wright, GM. 1979.  Self incompatibility in Eschscholzia 

californica.  Heredity.  4(3):429-31. 
 
Prepared By:  Christina Smith 
USDA-NRCS Plant Materials Center  
Lockeford, California 

Citation 
Smith, C. 2010. Plant guide for California poppy 
(Eschscholzia californica). USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Plant Materials Center. Lockeford, 
CA 95237. 

Published: April, 2012 
Edited: 28Sep2010 kdl; 29Sep2010 aym; 29mar2012msk; 
16Apr2012 jab,  

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

