RS HYBRID 

WHEATGRASS 

Elymus hoffmannii K.B. Jensen & 

K.H. Asay 

Plant Symbol = ELHO3 

 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Idaho Plant Materials 
Program and USDA ARS Forage and Range Laboratory.  

 'Newhy' Hybrid Wheatgrass. K. Jensen, ARS, UT  
 
Alternate Names 
Elytrigia repens x Pseudoroegneria spicata, 
RS wheatgrass x 
Pseudelymus   
‘Newhy’ 
 
Uses  
Grazing/range/pasture: RS hybrid wheatgrass is an 
advanced-generation hybrid between quackgrass (Elymus 
repens) and bluebunch wheatgrass (Pseudoroegneria 
spicata) (Jensen et al. 2001).  It has fair to good forage 
quality for cattle, sheep and horses (Snyder, 1992).   
 

 

Plant Guide

Hay: RS hybrid wheatgrass can provide more than one 
crop of hay each year with proper management.  Under 
high soil fertility and adequate irrigation, forage yields are 
lower than other forage grasses such as orchardgrass, 
meadow brome and tall fescue (Jensen et al. 2001).   
 
Wildlife: RS hybrid wheatgrass provides fair to good 
cover for small mammals, nongame birds, upland game 
birds and waterfowl (Snyder, 1992).   
 
Erosion control/reclamation: RS hybrid wheatgrass is 
especially suited for erosion control and reclamation on 
slight to moderate saline soils.  
 
Status  
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State Department 
of Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).  
 
Description  
General: Grass Family (Poaceae).  The botanical 
description of Elymus hoffmannii is from a breeding line 
of plants developed from seeds collected in Erzurum 
Province, Turkey by J.A. Hoffman and R.J. Metzger in 
1979 (Jensen and Asay, 1996).  There is no information 
regarding its native distribution.   
 
RS hybrid wheatgrass is slightly to moderately 
rhizomatous with glabrous culms reaching, 54-135 cm 
(21-53 in).  Leaves are evenly distributed along the culm; 
sheaths are glabrous and auricles absent to 1 mm (0.003 
in), truncate and erose.  Leaf blades are 5-13 mm (0.02-
0.05 in) wide, flat to involute, the top surface smooth and 
glabrous, the bottom surface smooth with the veins 
closely spaced, more or less equally prominent , smooth 
or scabrous.  The spikes are 10-50 cm (4-20 in) long, 0.8-
1.8 cm (0.3-0.7 in) wide with 1 spikelet per node.  
Spikelets are 15-27 mm (0.06-0.11 in) long with 5-7 
florets.  Glumes are equal, 5-11 mm (0.02-0.04 in) long, 
1.3-1.8 mm (0.05-0.07 in) wide and disarticulation is 
above the glumes.  Elymus hoffmannii differs from 
Elymus repens (quackgrass) primarily by having longer 
leaves, shorter awns on the glumes, and less rhizome 
development.  Elymus hoffmannii is predominantly cross-
pollinated and chromosome number is 2n = 42, x = 7.  
The description for Elymus hoffmannii was written to 
encompass the released cultivar ‘Newhy’ and some 
taxonomists believe the cultivar should be identified as x 
Pseudelymus ‘Newhy’ because it is derived from an 
artificial cross between Elymus repens and 
Pseudoroegneria spicata (Barkworth, Campbell and 
Salomon, 2007). 

 
 

 

 

 

of drought tolerance.  Although it is a cool season grass, 
its leaves retain their green color and succulence during 
the late summer better than other wheatgrass species, and 
if ample soil moisture exists, high quality forage is often 
available after seed maturity (Asay and Horton, 1991).   
 
In two plant materials salinity trials conducted in Utah, 
RS hybrid wheatgrass (RS-H) performed well.  RS-H and 
‘Newhy’ performed about the same but it appeared that 
RS-H utilized nitrogen better and did not display chlorosis 
to the same extent as Newhy.  Both materials were rated 
as having excellent palatability (Ogle, et. al, 2009).  
 
Establishment  
Some problems exist with germination and seedling vigor 
which can reduce initial stands.  However, once 
established, it becomes a vigorous, high yielding, 
nutritional forage that can withstand repeated grazing 
with good regrowth (Ogle, et. al., 2009).  Seed quality and 
germination is lower than other wheatgrass species and 
improved seed quality continues to be a breeding 
objective (Asay and Horton, 1991).   
 
RS hybrid wheatgrass should be planted with a drill to a 
depth of ¼ to ½ inch.  The single species seeding rate is 8 
pounds PLS per acre.  If used as a component of a mix, 
adjust to percent of mix desired.  When broadcast planting 
seed and for harsh critical planting areas and saline sites, 
the seeding rate should be increased to 14 – 16 pounds 
PLS per acre (Ogle, et. al., 2009).  Excellent stands have 
been obtained on dryland sites when seed is planted in 
late fall to ensure that germination does not occur until the 
following spring.  Spring seedings on dryland can be 
effective, but can be risky because weather conditions and 
excess soil moisture can delay planting until there is 
insufficient time for seeding establishment before hot 
temperatures of summer (Asay and Horton, 1991).   
 
Stands may require weed control measures during 
establishment, but application of broadleaf herbicides 
such as 2,4-D should not be made until plants have 
reached the four to six leaf stage.  Mow above seedlings 
when weeds are beginning to bloom to reduce weed seed 
production.  Grasshoppers and other insects may damage 
new stands and use of insecticides may be required.  
Always read and follow label directions when applying 
pesticides.  
  
Management  
RS hybrid wheatgrass begins growth early in the spring, 
retaining succulence and palatability for livestock later in 
the summer than many grasses.  It can provide two or 
more crops of hay with proper management and can 
withstand repeated grazing with good recovery.  Another 
option to consider is to harvest a hay crop in early 
summer and graze regrowth in late fall or early winter.  
Under intensive management, RS hybrid wheatgrass 
requires at least 25 days between grazing events.  During 
hot summer temperatures, resting periods should be 

Distribution:  The description of Elymus hoffmannii was 
described from a breeding line of plants developed from 
seeds collected in Erzurum Province, Turkey by J.A. 
Hoffman and R.J. Metzger in 1979 (Jensen and Asay, 
1996).  There is no information regarding its native 
distribution.  In North America, its distribution is limited 
to sites that have been planted with this species either as a 
component of a seeding mix or as a monoculture.   
 
For current distribution, consult the Plant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Adaptation  
RS hybrid wheatgrass is a long-lived perennial grass 
adapted to temperate semiarid rangelands that receive at 
least 13 inches of annual precipitation.  It is adapted to 
foothills, sagebrush and juniper sites up to 8,000 feet 
elevation and on saline dry or wet bottomland (Ogle, et. 
al., 2009).  It is well-suited for sites with moderate to high 
levels of salinity and can be used for irrigated and limited 
irrigation pasture.  On a saline site near Roosevelt, Utah, 
forage yields of RS hybrid wheatgrass were similar to tall 
wheatgrass and intermediate wheatgrass, and significantly 
greater than Russian wildrye, creeping foxtail, basin  
wildrye and Altai wildrye (Jensen, Asay, and Waldron, 
2003).   
 
Under irrigation, it yields significantly less than 
orchardgrass, tall fescue or meadowbrome but is 
significantly more drought tolerant than these grasses 
(Jensen, Asay, and Waldron, 2001).  Forage quality 
compares well with brome and orchardgrass and exceeds 
crested wheatgrass.  Compared with intermediate 
wheatgrass, it has improved palatability and similar levels 

extended to 35 days.  It is very responsive and somewhat 
dependent on applications of nitrogen during the growing 
season.  Split applications of nitrogen (approximately 50 
pounds per acre) after each grazing cycle or cutting are 
recommended.  However, if only one application is 
possible, apply nitrogen in the spring at approximately 
150-200 pounds per acre (Intermountain Planting Guide, 
2001).  Soils should be tested to determine precise 
fertilizer application rates.  
  
Pests and Potential Problems  
RS hybrid wheatgrass has shown moderate susceptibility 
to injury by the grass billbug Sphenophorus parvulus 
under ideal soil and moisture conditions for this insect 
(USDA-ARS, 1989).  
  
Environmental Concerns  
Although RS hybrid wheatgrass is morphologically 
distinct, its seed is similar in appearance to the quackgrass 
parent.  Therefore, to avoid problems with noxious weed 
laws, the cultivar ‘Newhy’ was licensed under Title 5 of 
the Plant Variety Protection Act of 1970.  Conditions of 
this protection specify that Newhy seed can be marketed 
only as a class of Certified seed (Asay, K.H., Horton, 
W.H. 1991).  
  
Contact your local agricultural extension specialist or 
county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use it safely.  Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method.  Trade names 
and control measures appear in this document only to 
provide specific information.  USDA NRCS does not 
guarantee or warranty the products and control methods 
named, and other products may be equally effective.  
 
Seed Production  
Seed production of RS hybrid wheatgrass is very 
successful under cultivated conditions.  For optimum seed 
production, seed should be drilled in 30 to 36 inch rows at 
25-30 pure live seeds per foot of row.  Application of 
fertilizer should be based on soil tests.  Typically, new 
seedings should not need fertilizer unless soil tests 
indicate deficiency of nitrogen, phosphorus and 
potassium.  Mature seed production fields should be 
fertilized in the fall with 40 to 60 pounds of nitrogen per 
acre.  Cultivate to maintain row culture and to control 
weeds.  Follow instructions on labels when using 
herbicides for weed control.  Seed yields range from 200 
pounds per acre on dryland areas receiving 16 or more 
inches of annual precipitation to 400 pounds per acre on 
irrigated land.  
  
Since seed maturity within a seedhead is variable, harvest 
the field when most of the seeds are mature.  Windrowing 
is a good alternative to direct combining because it allows 
seed to mature more evenly.  The crop should be 
windrowed about a week before seed maturity.  If crop is 
direct-combined, set the platform high enough to cut the 
seed and as little green growth as possible.  Seed should 

 

 

be dried immediately after direct-combining (Asay, 
Horton, 1991).  
  
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
  
‘Newhy’ was developed and released by the USDA-ARS 
in December, 1989 in cooperation with the Utah 
Agricultural Experiment Station and the USDA-SCS.  
Breeder and Foundation seed is maintained and produced 
by the USDA-ARS at Logan, Utah.  It is an artificial 
hybrid of Elymus repens and Pseudoroegneria spicata.  
Because of the morphological similarity of Newhy seed to 
that of quackgrass, the variety has protection under the 
Plant Variety Protection Act of 1970.  The conditions of 
the license specifies that Newhy seed can only be 
marketed as a class of Certified seed (USDA-ARS, 1989).  
  
RS-H hybrid wheatgrass was developed and released in 
May, 2002 by the USDA-ARS in cooperation with the 
Utah Agricultural Experiment Station as Tested class Pre-
variety Germplasm.  RS-H is a natural hybrid and is 
cytologically similar to and is infertile with the cultivar 
Newhy but is less rhizomatous, taller in stature and has 
longer flag leaves than Newhy.  Seed of RS-H is 
maintained by the USDA-ARS at Logan, Utah. 
 
‘AC Saltlander’ was developed and released by 
Agriculture Canada, Prairie Agricultural Research Centre 
in Swift Current Saskatchewan in 2006 (Stepphun et. al, 
2006).  A series of mass selection breeding cycles were 
performed on RS-H hybrid wheatgrass obtained from the 
USDA-ARS.  Evaluations for resistance to root-zone 
salinity, winter hardiness, uniform plant color, plant 
vigor, leafiness, seed-set and freedom from plant pests 
were conducted.  The resulting progeny has salinity 
tolerance equal to tall wheatgrass, Thinopyrum ponticum.  
A private seed company has exclusive rights to increase 
and market seed in Canada and the United States 
(AgCanada, 2010). 
 
References  
AgCanada, 2010.  A Grass for Salty Soil.  [Online].  
 
http:www.agcanada.com/Print.aspx?ID=20776 (accessed 
26 May 2010).  
Asay, K.H., Horton, W.H. 1991.  Release Brochure for 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jensen, K.B, Asay, K.H. 1996. Cytology and Morphology 
 
of Elymus hoffmannii (Poeaceae: Triticeae); A new 
species from the Erzurum Province of Turkey.  Int. 
 
J. Plant Sci. 157(6): 750-758.  
 
 
 

Newhy RS Hybrid Wheatgrass.  Utah State 
University. 2p.Barkworth, M. E., Campbell, J.J.N., 
and Salomon, B. 2007.  Elymus, published in 
Barkworth et al. (eds.), Flora of North America vol. 
24.  http://herbarium.usu.edu/webmanual 5 May 
2010.  

Available at 

 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

 

Registration of RS-H Hybrid Wheatgrass 
Germplasm.  Crop Sci. 43:1139-1140.  

USDA-ARS-FRRL. 2001. Intermountain Planting 
Guide. USDA-ARS-FRRL in conjunction with Utah 
State University Extension, Logan, UT.  

Grass, grass-like, forb, legume and woody species 
for the Intermountain West.  USDA-NRCS. ID-
TN24. Boise, ID  

matter production of orchardgrass and perennial 
ryegrass at five irrigation levels.  Crop Sci. 41:479-
487.  

InformationSystem, [Online].  U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, forest Service, Rocky Mountain  
Research Station, fire Sciences Laboratory.  
http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/.   

Jensen, K.B, Asay, K.H., and Waldron, B.L. 2001. Dry 
 
 
 
Jensen, K.B, Asay, K.H., and Waldron, B.L. 2003.  
 
 
Jensen, K., H. Horton, R. Reed, R. Whitesides, and 
 
 
 
Ogle, D., St. John, L., Stannard, M., Holzworth, L. 2009.  
 
 
 
Ogle, D., Truman, D., Prevedel, B. and Beals, T. 2009.  
Plants Materials Salinity Trials.  USDA-NRCS, ID-
 
 
TN9B. Boise, ID  
Snyder, S.A. 1992.  Elymus repens. In: Fire Effects 
 
 
 
 
Stepphun, H., Jefferson, P.G., Iwaasa, A.D. and J.G. 
 
Mcleod. 2006.  AC Saltlander green wheatgrass. 
 
Canadian Journal of Plant Science 86(4).  
USDA-ARS, 1989.  Release Notice for “Newhy’ RS 
 
 
  
Prepared By  
Loren St. John, USDA, NRCS, Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, ID  
  
Kevin Jensen, USDA, ARS, Forage and Range 
Laboratory, Logan UT  
  
Daniel G. Ogle, USDA, NRCS, Boise, ID  
  
Derek Tilley, USDA, NRCS, Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, ID  
  
Citation  
St. John, L., K. Jensen, D.G. Ogle, D. Tilley. 2010.  Plant 
guide for RS Hybrid wheatgrass (Elymus hoffmannii). 
USDA-Natural Resources Conservation Service, 
Aberdeen, ID Plant Materials Center and USDA-ARS 
Forage and Range Laboratory, Logan, UT  
  
Published August, 2010 
 
Edited: 25May 2010ls; 21June2010djt:; 21June2010 ls; 
21June 2010 KBJ; 21June2010dgo; 26July2010jab  

Wheatgrass, Elytrigia repens (L.) Nevski X 
Pseudoroegneria spicata (Pursh) A. Love  

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 
 
 
 
 

 

