 
 

 

Plant Guide

Description 
General: Blueweed is a member of the borage family 
(Boraginaceae). It is an introduced species native to 
Europe. Blueweed can be a biennial or short-lived 
perennial. It has a significant rooting system comprised of 
a tap root and smaller fibrous roots. The tap root is black 
and can range in length from 12 to 32 inches (30.5 to 81 
centimeters), allowing deep soil penetration. Vegetation 
forms initially as a basal rosette. Rosette leaves are 
simple, entire, oblanceolate, approximately 2.5 to 10 
inches in length and 0.5 to 3 inches in width, with a single 
vein and a short petiole. Stem leaves are alternate in 
arrangement becoming progressively smaller and bract-
like towards the top of the stem. Mature plants grow one 
to many erect, branching flowering stems reaching over 
36 inches in height. Both the stems and leaves are covered 
with stout, spreading hairs that have swollen, red, purple 
or black bases, underlain by smaller fine appressed hairs. 
The swollen bases of the spreading hairs give the stems a 
spotted appearance. 
 
The stem terminates in a panicle inflorescence, each 
branch of the panicle forms a short helicoid cyme, shaped 
like a scorpions tail, subtended by an upper foliage leaf. 
There can be as many as 50 cymes per stem, and each 
cyme bears up to 20 flowers. The showy flowers range in 
size from 0.4 to 0.8 inch. The funnel-shaped, five-lobed, 
pubescent flowers are typically bright blue, but may also 
be purple, pink, or rarely white. Flowers widen as they 
mature, and the upper lobes are noticeably longer. 
Another identifying characteristic is the five pink or red 
stamens, one of which is noticeably shorter than the four 
which are long-exerted beyond the corolla tube. The 
superior ovary is four-lobed with the style arising from 
the center of the lobes. 
 
The seeds of blueweed are called nutlets. They are brown 
or gray with a rounded pyramid shape, and are very small, 
(< 0.1 inch long and wide, or 2.4 x 1.6 x 1.5 millimeters). 
The surface of the nutlets is rough and very hard. This 
characteristic provides blueweed seeds with moderate 
survival times in the seed bank, with a three year survival, 
typical at depths of 6 inches (15 centimeters) or more. 
 
Distribution: For current distribution, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
Life history: Blueweed is a monocarpic perennial, 
meaning it flowers once and dies. This typically takes two 
years (biennial) but can take as long as five years. No 
blueweed plant that has flowered has been observed to 
survive and grow a secondary rosette. Populations of 
blueweed have been observed to be cyclic similar to 
yellow sweetclover; one year an infestation will be 

BLUEWEED 
Echium vulgare L. 
Plant Symbol = ECVU 

 
Contributed by: USDA, NRCS, Montana State Office 
 

 

Blueweed plants growing in Washington. Photo courtesy of Stevens 
County, Washington, Noxious Weed Control Board, 2000. 
 
Alternate Names 
Common viper’s bugloss, blue thistle, blue devil, and 
snake flower. 
 
Uses 
Blueweed has been used as a horticultural plant. 
 
Status 
Please  consult  the  PLANTS  Web  site  and  your  State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status  (e.g.,  threatened  or  endangered  species,  state 
noxious  status, and  wetland indicator values). This plant 
can  be  weedy  and  invasive,  and  is  listed  as  noxious  in 
Washington and Montana. 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation 
if not properly managed. Please consult with your local 
NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service 
office, state natural resource, or state agriculture 
department regarding its status and use. Weed information 
is also available from the PLANTS Web site at 
plants.usda.gov. Please consult the Related Web Sites on 
the Plant Profile for this species for further information. 

 

densely populated followed by one or more years of 
sparse population. 
 
Typically, seedlings emerge in the spring. However, some 
seedlings emerge in the summer and autumn. Blueweed 
seeds (nutlets) have high viability at maturity (90%) and 
the thick nutlet wall provides some dormancy. 
Stratification increases germination. Seeds can remain 
viable for three years when buried in the soil, but seeds 
sown on the soil surface do not persist for more than one 
year. Vegetative reproduction of blueweed has not been 
observed. 
 
Rosettes develop and increase in diameter throughout the 
growing season. During this time, blueweed forms a large 
root system that enables its survival in drought-prone 
habitats. The semi-succulent leaves and epidermal leaf 
hairs also provide drought tolerance. The older rosette 
leaves die after the onset of freezing in the autumn 
leaving a few small central rosette leaves to survive 
throughout the winter. 
 
Rosettes must go through a cold vernalization period and 
reach a certain size before flowering. Bolting begins in 
early June for plants that meet these requirements. 
Flowers bloom beginning in early June and continue 
blooming until mid-September or until the first hard frost. 
Flowering commonly occurs in two phases, the first is 
from June to July with a second flowering phase 
occurring from August to October in later blooming 
plants. Blueweed is pollinated by insects and the ruby-
throated hummingbird. More than 50 insect species visit 
the flowers including honeybees, bumblebees, halicitid 
bees, and butterflies. Seeds mature about one month after 
bloom. Seed dispersal begins about one month after seeds 
mature, generally in early August, peaking in September, 
and continuing through early November. Plants produce 
from 500 to 2,000 seeds per plant. 
 
Adaptation 
Blueweed is native to southern Europe. It is adapted to 
temperate areas with cool winters, warm summers, and a 
relatively moist climate. Arid regions including deserts, 
dry grasslands, and chaparral generally do not support 
blueweed populations. Abundant populations are found 
on coarse, sandy soils of limestone or dolomite parent 
material, although populations can also be found in areas 
with acidic soils and granitic parent material. It grows 
well on soils with poor fertility. It is a weed of sparsely 
vegetated and disturbed areas and typically is found in 
wastelands or disturbed areas, along roadsides and 
watercourses, and in overgrazed pastures. Blueweed does 
not grow well under dense vegetation. 
 
Establishment 
Blueweed nutlets have no morphological adaptations for 
dispersal and most seeds fall to the ground passively near 
the parent plant resulting in a patchy distribution of 
plants. Nutlets weigh about 2.5 milligrams and can drift 

 

 

short distances on the wind. Nutlets float and are 
transported by floodwaters and rain-wash. Some nutlets 
remain within the calyx of the stiff-haired flower that can 
attach to animal fur. Detached nutlets can also be 
transported in animal fur and by ants. Vehicles and 
equipment can also move seeds long distances. Because 
of its showy blue flowers, blueweed has been planted in 
gardens from which it can spread to adjacent lands. 
 
Management 
See control below. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Blueweed can be invasive. See environmental concerns 
below. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
Blueweed reduces forage production and wildlife habitat. 
Grazing animals avoid foraging on blueweed because of 
the stiff hairs on the stems and leaves and because of the 
high concentrations of pyrrolizidine alkaloids contained in 
these plant parts. The alkaloids accumulate in the liver 
when ingested where they can cause liver disease. Skin 
contact with the hairs also causes dermatitis resulting in 
inflammation and itching in humans. Blueweed is an 
alternate host to wheat rust, is a natural host to alfalfa 
mosaic virus, tobacco mosaic virus, and cabbage black 
ring spot. 
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Not applicable. 
 
Control  

Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use it safely. Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method. Trade names 
and control measures appear in this document only to 
provide specific information. USDA NRCS does not 
guarantee or warranty the products and control methods 
named, and other products may be equally effective. 
Herbicide: Herbicide trials on a rangeland site in Ravalli 
County, Montana, showed metsulfuron  (1 ounce/acre 
product-Escort and others), chlorsulfuron (1 ounce/acre 
product-Telar and others), or their combination (0.5 + 0.5 
ounce/acre) applied to rosettes in the spring or fall 
provided nearly 100 percent control of blueweed one year 
after treatment. Pasture formulations containing 2,4-D at 
1-2 quarts/acre have been used successfully on blueweed 
in the rosette stage during active growth. Multiple 
applications may be required to ensure complete control 
of this species. Blueweed is listed on the Crossbow® 
label (2,4-D + triclopyr) for control using a 1 percent 
mixture or 1 quart/acre applied during active growth. 
Always consult product labels and read them carefully to 
ensure correct species/land management usage, chemical 
application rates, and precautionary requirements. 
 

Hand pulling: Pulling or digging blueweed by hand works 
well for smaller infestation if the soil is moist. Care 
should be taken when hand pulling to ensure the tap root 
is removed because this plant can regenerate if the root 
remains. Pulling or digging should be done before plants 
bloom to help prevent seed production. If blooming has 
already occurred, the plants should either be burned or 
bagged for disposal. A long-sleeve shirt and gloves are 
recommended for protection while pulling blueweed as 
the stiff hairs on the stems and leaves may irritate the 
skin. 
 
Mowing: Mowing or cutting the plants can help reduce 
seed production on larger infestations in the short term, 
but re-sprouting and production of flowers or seeds below 
the blade level are common. Mowed areas should be 
carefully monitored. 
 
Tilling: Research in Canada and Europe demonstrated 
that under cultivation blueweed was displaced by other 
plants. However, the disturbance of tillage can create a 
favorable environment for blueweed growth and 
reproduction by reducing competitive perennial plants. 
Tillage should be combined with herbicide management 
and followed by revegetation with desired, competitive 
plants. 
 
Irrigation: Blueweed does well under moist conditions 
and therefore irrigation is not recommended as a control 
by itself. Where blueweed invades irrigated pastures and 
hayland, carefully planned irrigation management will 
stimulate the competitiveness of the forage crop and when 
combined with nutrient, forage harvest, and grazing 
management practices will help prevent the re-
establishment of blueweed after other control practices 
are applied. 
Fertilization: Blueweed does well on soils with low 
fertility. Also, flowering of blueweed is reduced under 
high nutrient conditions. On cultivated pastures and hay 
meadows, nutrient management is important to 
maintaining the competitiveness of desired perennial 
grasses. Nutrient management combined with judicious 
use of herbicides and crop rotation is recommended where 
blueweed invades non-native pastures and hay meadows. 
 
Prescribed burning: No specific information is available 
for prescribed fire effects on blueweed. Although 
flowering plants may be burned to control seed 
production and distribution, large-scale burning could 
create a disturbed environment favorable to blueweed and 
other invasive plant species. Areas within a prescribed 
burn where blueweed has invaded should be monitored 
and treated with herbicides where necessary. 
 
Grazing management: No information was found on 
grazing management of blueweed. Generally blueweed is 
avoided by large herbivores because of the stiff hairs on 

 

the foliage and toxic alkaloids. Prescribed grazing to 
maintain grazing land health will help prevent new 
populations of blueweed and reestablishment of 
populations after control measures are applied. 
 
Biological control: Currently, there are no biological 
control agents approved for management of blueweed. 
There are three North American insect species known to 
feed on the species: a lace bug (Dictyla echii Schrank), 
moth (Ethmia bipunctella Fabricus), and chrysomelid 
beetle (Longitarsus melanurus Melsheimer). These 
insects are not known to occur in the Northwest United 
States. 
 
Revegetation: Blueweed is not shade tolerant and is 
seldom found on closed vegetative communities. 
Disturbance is favorable to blueweed and removal of 
natural vegetation provides opportunities for 
establishment. Revegetation of disturbances is therefore 
important to prevent blueweed invasion. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
Not Applicable. 
 
References 
Klemow, K.M., D.R. Clements, P.F. Threadgill, and P.B. 
Carvers.  2002. The biology of Canadian weeds.  116.  
Echium vulgare L. Canadian Journal of Plant Science. 82: 
235-248. 
Prepared By 
Melissa Graves  
Extension Weeds and IPM Specialist, Montana State 
University, Bozeman, Montana 
Jane Mangold   
Extension Invasive Species Specialist, Montana State 
University, Bozeman, Montana 
Jim Jacobs  
USDA, NRCS, Montana State Office, Bozeman, Montana 
 
Species Coordinator 
Jim Jacobs  
USDA, NRCS, Montana State Office, Bozeman, Montana 

Published:  January 2010 
Edited:  16Oct09JSJ; 12Nov09KLP 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

