 
 

 

Plant Guide

current status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General: Canada wildrye is a native, cool-season 
perennial bunchgrass that grows 2.5- to 5- feet tall.  
Plants flower from March to June with seed maturing 
in July.  The seedhead is a thick and bristly spike 
which can be either erect or nodding and can reach 
10 inches in length, leaf blades are .5 inches wide or 
less.  Auricles are claw-like and clasping, arising 
from a broad, yellowish or light green collar.  
Spikelets are mostly 3-5 flowered.  Glumes are about 
equal and not bowed out at the base.  Lemmas mostly 
0.5 inch long with a flexuous awn 0.5 to 2 inches 
long with a slight outward curve at maturity (Gould, 
1975).  
 
Distribution:  For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.  Canada wildrye is found 
throughout the U.S. except in the Southeast  
 
Habitat:  Canada wildrye tends to be a short-lived, 
cool-season grass found growing on shaded stream 
banks, along fence rows and in open woodlands.  It 
also is found on sandy shores and dunes in the 
Northeast.   
 
Adaptation   
Canada wildrye is adapted to coarse textured sandy, 
gravelly or rocky soils.  It is more tolerant of 
droughty, poor fertility soils than Virginia wildrye 
(Stubbendieck et. al, 1992
tolerance.  It also appears to have moderate salinity 
tolerance. Lavaca Germplasm Canada wildrye has 
performed well on both coarse and fine textured soils.  
Lavaca Germplasm can be used as a cool-season 
component in native seed mixtures for range 
restoration.  It also can be used as a cool-season 
pasture.  Because of its shade tolerance, Canada 
wildrye may be best suited for use in shaded areas or 
riparian zones. 
 
Establishment 
Seedbed preparation should begin well in advance of 
planting.  Planting can be scheduled for early spring 
or early fall.  Establish a clean, weed-free seedbed by 
either tillage or herbicides.  Prior to planting, the site 
should be firm and have accumulated soil moisture.   
 
Canada wildrye is best seeded using a native-grass 
drill with picker wheels to ensure a good planting of 
the seed.  Broadcast seeding may be used in areas not 

).  It has good shade 

CANADA WILDRYE 

Elymus canadensis L. 

Plant Symbol = ELCA4 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS, E. “Kika” de la Garza 
Plant Materials Center 

 Scribn. & J.G. Sm. 

 Shelly D. Maher, E. “Kika” de la Garza PMC 
Alternate Names 
Elymus brachystachys Scribn. & C.R. Ball 
Elymus crescendus L.C. Wheeler 
Elymus philadelphicus L. 
Elymus robustus
 
Uses 
Restoration: Canada wildrye is often an early 
successional component of prairie mixtures.  
 
Livestock: Canada wildrye provides good forage 
quality during the early part of the grazing season but 
is generally considered an inferior forage after it 
matures.  It is fairly palatable to most livestock, and 
is rated good in energy value but poor in protein 
value. 
 
Wildlife: Canada wildrye has fair palatability as food 
for wildlife.  It also provides nesting, brood, winter, 
and escape cover.  
 
Erosion Control: Exceptional seedling vigor and 
rapid establishment make Canada wildrye an 
excellent species for use in erosion control seedings.  
Stands of Canada wildrye typically establish during 
the 1st year, reach peak production the 2nd or 3rd
 year, 
and then rapidly thin out.  This species is sometimes 
used in seeding mixtures where quick establishment 
and stabilization is needed. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 

 

easily planted with a drill, but some type of 
additional coverage such as culti-packing or light 
dragging will be beneficial to ensure good seed to 
soil contact.  Debearding the seed or seed coatings 
(talc based) can also be used to increase the 
flowability of the seed through standard seed drills.  
 
Seed should be planted 1/4 to 1/2 inch deep.  For 
calibration purposes, there are from 85-115,000 seeds 
per pound. A seeding rate of 10 pounds of pure live 
seed (PLS) per acre is recommended.  In planting 
mixtures reduce the rate according to the percent of 
Canada wildrye in the mixture.  
 
Soil analysis should be performed prior to planting to 
determine the necessary levels of nitrogen, 
phosphorus and potassium.  Nitrogen should not be 
applied until the stand is established.   
 
Management 
Canada wildrye should not be grazed the first year.  
After a stand is established, either continuous or 
rotational grazing can be used.  Contact your local 
NRCS field office for assistance in developing a 
prescribed grazing plan. 
  
For good quality, nutritious hay Canada wildrye 
should be cut just as the heads are emerging from the 
boot.  Plants should occasionally be allowed to 
produce seed to insure stand health. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Common pests of Canada wildrye include fall 
armyworms (Spodoptera spp.), grubworms 
(Phyllophagac crinita
ergot (Claviceps purpurea) and rice stink bugs 
(Oebalus pugnax). Control of the pests may be 
necessary in order to produce seed crops in dry years 
under irrigation. 
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Seed increase plots have been planted on 36” bedded 
rows, however flat plantings may be possible with 
frequent weeding. Deep soil tillage or frequent close 
cultivation is recommended to promote seed 
production.  Commercial herbicides are available for 
weed control once plants are beyond the seedling 
growth stage. Consult your local extension weed 
specialist for recommended herbicides. 
 
Canada wildrye produces seed once a year in the late 
spring or early summer.  Seed is harvested with a 
combine.  The use of slow travel and RPM speeds 
while harvesting results in relatively clean seed, 
needing little cleaning or processing. Debearding of 
the seed has been accomplished through the use of a 
Westrup brush machine.  To clean stems and chaff 
from harvests, a clipper seed cleaner has been used 
following the debearding treatment.  
 

), leaf rust (Puccinia hordei), 

 

 

Well managed seed fields have produced from 150-
500 bulk pounds per acre of clean seed.  Purity of the 
seed is usually around 95% and germination rates are 
about 85%.  Canada wildrye has a very short shelf-
life.  In humidity and temperature controlled facilities 
the expected viability of the seed is only 2-3 years. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These materials are readily available from 
commercial sources. 
 
‘Manadan’ (ND) was released in 1946 by the ARS 
Northern Great Plains Research Laboratory at 
Mandan, North Dakota for use in the northern Great 
Plains states. The variety is superior to common 
Canada wildrye in several characteristics. The plants 
are finer, lower in height, and more leafy with the 
leaves being softer in texture. It is also longer lived 
than many strains and has the ability to withstand 
grazing over a period of several years.  The 
Agricultural Research Service (Northern Great Plains 
Research Laboratory, Mandan, North Dakota) 
maintains the breeder seed of Mandan Canada 
wildrye. Foundation seed is grown and available 
from the Bismarck Plant Materials Center. 
 
Lavaca Germplasm (Hallettsville, Lavaca County, 
Texas) Canada wildrye was released in 2000 by the 
USDA-NRCS E. “Kika” de la Garza Plant Materials 
Center at Kingsville, Texas to provide a southern 
ecotype of Canada wildrye.  The main attributes of 
Lavaca Germplasm Canada wildrye are its ease of 
establishment, rapid growth, and high seed and 
forage yields.  Breeder seed is maintained by the E. 
“Kika” de la Garza Plant Materials Center in 
conjunction with Texas Foundation Seed Service.   
 
References 
Gould, F.W. 1975. The Grasses of Texas.  Texas 
A&M University Press. College Station, TX. 
Stubbendieck,J.L., S.L.Hatch,C.H.Butterfield and 

B.P. Jansen. 1992. North American Range 
Plants.  University of Nebraska Press.  Lincoln, 
NE. 

 
Prepared By 
John Lloyd-Reilley, Manager 
USDA-NRCS E. “Kika” de la Garza Plant Materials 
Center, Kingsville, Texas. 
 
Citation 
Lloyd-Reilley, J.  2010.  Plant guide for Canada 
wildrye (Elymus canadensis). USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, E. “Kika” de la 
Garza Plant Materials Center.  Kingsville, TX.   

Published October, 2010 
Edited: 16Sept2010 sdm 

For more information about this and other plants, 
please contact your local NRCS field office or 
Conservation District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ 
and visit the PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant Materials Program 
Web site http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov.   

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or 
availability of other Web sites.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

