 
 

 

Plant Guide

forage in winter months but not in summer because the 
leaves have fewer secondary volatile chemicals in winter. 
Bhat et al. (1990) found some accessions of rubber 
rabbitbrush ranked high in crude protein, phosphorus and 
digestibility in comparison to other winter browse species, 
and suggested these accessions could be selected for 
superior germplasm releases.  
 
Wildlife habitat: The leaves, flowers and seeds of rubber 
rabbitbrush are a food source for deer, antelope, elk, small 
mammals and birds. The plant also provides cover for 
small mammals and birds such as jackrabbits and sage 
grouse.  
 
Pollinator habitat: Rubber rabbitbrush attracts a wide 
array of native insects, including butterflies and small 
bees (Utah Native Plant Society 2009; Ogle et al. 2007). It 
is one the few native plant species in the Intermountain 
West that provides habitat for pollinators during the late 
summer and fall months (Ogle et al. 2007).  
 
Range revegetation: Rubber rabbitbrush is deep rooted 
and produces heavy litter (Aldon and Pase 1981) and has 
the potential to stabilize soils, moderate soil temperature 
and moisture, as well as add aesthetic value to degraded 
land (Romo and Eddleman 1994).  
 
Erosion control: Rubber rabbitbrush grows rapidly and 
produces abundant seed (Romo and Eddleman 1994). It 
can be used to stabilize roadsides and other critical areas.  
 
Mine reclamation: The plant is able to grow on a variety 
of substrates, including sand, shale, slickrock and other 
unusual substrate types (Meyer et al. 1989) and is an ideal 
plant for mine reclamation.  
 
Ethnobotanical: The Hopi stripped the bark from the 
branches of rubber rabbitbrush and used the branches for 
basket weaving (Stubbendieck et al. 2003). The Navajo 
used the flowers to make yellow dye (Lady Bird Johnson 
Wildflower Center 2009). Native Americans also used 
rubber rabbitbrush for chewing gum, tea, cough syrup, 
and to treat chest pains (Stubbendeick et al 2003). During 
World War II the plant was studied as a substitute for 
commercial rubber, and currently it is a small commercial 
rubber source (Utah State University 2009).  
 
Ornamental: The attractive, late-blooming flowers, 
silvery-green foliage, and drought tolerance of rubber 
rabbitbrush make it a desirable plant for low maintenance 
and sustainable landscaping. It is recommended by the 
Utah Native Plant Society (2009) as a screen or 
background for summer flowers.  

RUBBER RABBITBRUSH 
Ericameria nauseosa (pallas ex 
Pursh) G.L. Nesom & Baird 

Plant Symbol = ERNA10 

 Contributed byUSDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Pullman, Washington  

 Sally and Andy Wasowski, Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center, 
www.wildflower.org 
 
 Alternate Names  
Grey rabbitbrush, golden rabbitbrush, chamiso blanco, 
Chrysothamnus nauseosus (Pallas ex Pursh) Britton, 
Chrysocoma nauseosa Pallas ex Pursh, Bigelovia 
nauseosa Gray  
 
Uses  
Forage: Rubber rabbitbrush has marginal value for all 
classes of livestock and has occasionally been reported to 
be toxic (Stubbendieck et al. 2003). It is, however, an 
important browse species on depleted range land and can 
be heavily used by wildlife during winter months (Utah 
State University 2009). Halls et al. (1994) report browsing 
animals, especially mule deer, use rubber rabbitbrush as 

 

The plant can be cut back after fall flowering to prevent 
seed dispersal and to retain its compact, rounded shape 
(Utah Native Plant Society 2009). 

 

Tad Dillhoff, Burke Museum of Natural History and Culture,  
University of Washington 
http://biology.burke.washington.edu/herbarium/ imagecollection.php  
 
Status  
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State Department 
of Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g. 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).  
 
Description  
General: Composite family (Asteraceae). Rubber 
rabbitbrush is a native, perennial, warm-season shrub that 
grows to 1 to 8 feet tall. It has a rounded crown and stems 
originating from its base. Stems are yellowish green, 
flexible, erect and spreading, and are covered with a 
dense felt-like layer of white hairs. Leaves are 0.75 to 
2.75 inches long, 0.02 to 0.12 inches wide, alternate, 
linear to spatula shaped with entire margins, 1 to 3 
nerved, and are also covered with white hairs. Flowers are 
yellow, tubular, 0.25 to 0.4 inch long, arranged in 
terminal, rounded clusters. The flower bracts are narrow, 
layered and papery. Flowers begin bloom in late July in 
cool montane environments, in October in hot desert 
environments, and at variable times in cold desert 
environments (Meyer et al. 1989). Inflorescences and 
seed bracts often persist through winter. Seeds are 
achenes with pappus and are wind disseminated. 
Reproduction is primarily by seeds and epicormic buds. 
Out-crossing is infrequent (Anderson 1966).  
 
The species is taxonomically complex, and was 
previously divided into 22 subspecies. The 22 subspecies 
have been reorganized into two subspecies and 22 
varieties (ecotypes) (USDA-NRCS 2009). The 22 
ecotypes exhibit a great deal of variability in 
morphological characteristics and chemical composition.  
 
Distribution: Ericameria naseosa is present in New York 
and all western states in the United States, and in the 
Canadian provinces of Alberta, Saskatchewan, and British 
Columbia. Subspecies cosimilis has 8 varieties found 

 

 

primarily in the southwestern United States. Subspecies 
nauseosa has 14 varieties found throughout the western 
United States and Canada. Different varieties are often 
found growing in adjacent habitats of the same locality 
(Meyer et al. 1989). For current distributions, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site.  
 
Habitat: Rubber rabbitbrush inhabits dry, open areas on 
plains, valley bottoms, foothills and mountains. It is 
associated with many ecological sites, including: oak-
hickory, elm-ash-cottonwood, ponderosa pine, sagebrush, 
desert shrub, chaparral-mountain shrub, pinyon-juniper, 
and mountain, plains and desert grasslands (Tirmenstein 
1999). It is considered to be an early- to mid-seral species, 
and may dominate some sites following a disturbance. 
Over time it usually declines and becomes a minor 
component of the native plant community (Tirmenstein 
1999).  
 
Adaptation  
Rubber rabbitbrush is adapted to cold, dry environments 
receiving 7 to 18 inches of annual precipitation at 
elevations ranging from 450 to 8,000 feet (Tirmenstein 
1999). Depending on the ecotype, rubber rabbitbrush can 
be found on loamy, sandy, gravelly or heavy clay soils 
that are slightly acidic, slight to strongly basic, or saline. 
Some ecotypes have a great deal of plasticity, allowing 
them to establish in a variety of habitats (McArthur 1979).  
 
Establishment  
Rubber rabbitbrush can be established by transplanting 
seedlings, or drilling or broadcasting seed. Planting can be 
done in spring or fall, on prepared or unprepared seedbeds 
(Tirmenstein 1999). Rubber rabbitbrush should be seeded 
in a mixture with forbs and grasses at a rate of 0.025 
pound Pure Live Seed (PLS) per acre (Ogle et al. 2009). 
This rate should be doubled if the seed is broadcast.  
 
Romo and Eddleman (1994) determined rubber 
rabbitbrush had the highest seedling establishment when 
seeded prior to or during periods when seedbed 
temperature was between 68 and 86 degrees Fahrenheit, 
and when soil moisture was near its seasonal high. Cox 
and Anderson (2004) had better success establishing 
rubber rabbitbrush and other vegetation when seeded into 
stands of crested wheatgrass (Agropyron cristatum [L.] 
Gaertner) as opposed to seeding in stands dominated by 
cheatgrass (Bromus tectorum L.).  
 
Management  
Rubber rabbitbrush is often associated with non-native 
invasive plants which establish at the same time following 
a disturbance (Enloe et al. 2009). However, the presence 
of rubber rabbitbrush may actually reduce the severity of 
weed invasion (Krueger-Mangold et al. 2006). Where 
land managers intend to control invasive weeds while 
minimizing damage to rubber rabbitbrush, application of 
chlosulfuron may be an effective strategy (Enloe et al. 
2009).  

A number of land managers consider rubber rabbitbrush 
to be undesirable due to its low forage value (Romo and 
Eddleman 1988). However, in some areas it may actually 
enhance the growth of desirable plants. Frischknecht 
(1963) found late summer and fall growth of crested 
wheatgrass was more lush under rabbitbrush than under 
sagebrush or in the open. He attributed this result to the 
ability of rabbitbrush to trap and retain moisture from 
snow, and differences between rabbitbrush and crested 
wheatgrass in root morphology and timing of growth. 
Rubber rabbitbrush does not produce lateral roots, and its 
peak growth period is relatively late in the growing 
season.  
 
Control  
Because rubber rabbitbrush re-sprouts from basal buds, 
mechanical cultivation and fire typically increase stand 
density. Chemical control is fairly successful with 
applications of clopyralid, dicamba, 2-4-D ester 
(Whisenhant 1988) and metsulfuron (Enloe et al. 2009) in 
mid to late spring when plants have obtained 
approximately 2 to 3 inches of new growth and soil 
moisture is still readily available.  
 
Contact your local agricultural extension specialist or 
county weed specialist to determine what works best in 
your area and how to use it safely. Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method. Control 
measures appear in this document only to provide specific 
information. USDA NRCS does not guarantee or 
warranty the products and control methods named, and 
other products may be equally effective.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems  
Some ecotypes of rubber rabbitbrush are infected by stem 
galls, which are caused by two species of tephritid flies 
(Aciurina species) (McArthur 1979). There are no reports 
of negative effects caused by the galls.  
 
Environmental Concerns  
Although rubber rabbitbrush may appear to dominate a 
plant community soon after disturbance, it is not overly 
competitive (McArthur 1979) and is eventually replaced 
with other vegetation as the community matures 
(Tirmenstein 1999; Ogle et al. 2009).  
 
Seeds and Plant Production  
Rubber rabbitbrush is fast growing, reaching maturity in 2 
to 4 years, and has a lifespan of 5 to 20 years (McArthur 
and Taylor 2004). Plants begin producing seeds when 
they are 2 or more years old (Deitschman et al. 1974). 
Seeds can be harvested in fall or early winter by shaking 
or stripping the heads from the branches. Processing in a 
hammer mill followed by a screen fanning mill effectively 
cleans the seeds prior to sowing.  
There are about 693,000 rubber rabbitbrush seeds per 
pound (Deitschman et al. 1974). The seed is non-dormant, 
although stratification speeds germination (Dietshman et 
al. 1974) and lowers the temperature at which seeds 

 

 

germinate (Meyer et al. 1989). Seed germination is not 
dependent on light (Belcher 1985). Germination is 
relatively high (65 percent) and remains high for up to 3 
years in storage with moderate temperature and relative 
humidity conditions (Stevens et al. 1981).  
 
McArthur et al. (1987) found drastic differences in 
germination rate within and among populations of rubber 
rabbitbrush. When tested at 37.4 degrees Fahrenheit, 
collections from hot desert environments germinated the 
fastest, those from montane and high-latitude 
environments germinated the slowest, and collections 
from mid-elevation environments had variable 
germination rates. Rate of germination is a result of 
genetic and environmental factors, and is timed to 
maximize the probability of seedling survival in each 
habitat (Meyer et al. 1989).  
 
Container production in a peat-like media with low 
nutrition results in a well-rooted seedling in a 40-cubic-
inch container in 1 growing season, and a 1 to 2 gallon 
container in two growing seasons. Given ideal plant 
nutrition and an extended growing season, rabbitbrush can 
fill a 1 to 2 gallon container in asingle growing season. 
Rubber rabbitbrush can withstand heavy and repeated 
pruning during production.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
None  
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service office for more information. Look in the phone 
book under United States Government. The Natural 
Resources Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Department of Agriculture.”  
 
References  
Aldon, E.F and C.P. Pase. 1981. Plant species adaptability 
 
 
 
 
Anderson, L.C. 1966. Cytotaxonomic studies in 
 
 
Belcher, E. [ed.]. 1985. Handbook on seeds of browse-
shrubs and forbs. USDA Forest Service Southern 
 
 
Reg. Tech. Publ. R8-TP8.  
Bhat, R.B., B.L. Welch, D.J. Weber, E.D. McArthur. 
 
 
 
Burke Museum of Natural History and Culture. [Online]. 
 
 
 
 
  Washington, Seattle, WA.  

Available at 
http://biology.burke.washington.edu/herbarium/imag
ecollection.php?Genus=Ericameria&Species=nauseo
sa (accessed 10 Nov 2009). University of 

1990. Mid-winter protein, phosphorus, and 
digestibility of Chrysothamnus nauseosus subspecies. 
J. of Range Manage. 43:177-179.  

on mine spoils in the Southwest: a case study. 
Research Note RM-398. USDA Forest Service, 
Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Exper. Sta., Fort 
Collins, CO.  

Chrysothamnus (Astereae, Compositae). Am. J. Bot. 
53:204-212.  

 

diversity of cheatgrass-dominated rangeland through 
assisted succession. J. of Range Manage. 57:203-210.  

sagebrush and rubber rabbitbrush on production of 
crested wheatgrass. J. of Range Manage. 16:70-74.  

Available at 
http://www.wildflower.org/plants/result.php?id_plant
=ERNA10 (accessed 2 Dec 2009). University of 
Texas, Austin, TX.  

variation in volatile secondary compounds of 
Chrysothamnus nauseosus (Pallas) Britt.; Asteraceae 
spp. hololeucus (Gray) Hall. & Clem. influences 
herbivory. J. Chem. Ecol. 20:2055-2063.  

Aagard. 2009. Black greasewood (Sarcobatus 
vermiculatus), gray rabbitbrush (Ericameria 
nauseosa), and perennial grass response to 
chlorsulfuron and metsulfuron. Invasive Plant Sci. 
and Manage. 2:247-252.  

Cox, R.D. and V.J. Anderson. 2004. Increasing native 
 
 
Deitschman, G.H., K.R. Jorgensen, and A.P. Plummer. 
1974. Chrysothamnus. In C.S. Schopmeyer [ed.],  
 
Seeds of woody plants in the United States. USDA 
 
 
Handb. 450.  
Enloe, S.F., A. Kniss, M. Ferrell, J. Lafantasie, and S.D. 
 
 
 
 
 
Frischknecht, N.C. 1963. Contrasting effects of big 
 
 
Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center. [Online]. 
 
 
 
 
Halls, S.C., D.R. Gang, and D.J. Weber. 1994. Seasonal 
 
 
 
 
Krueger-Mangold, J.M., R.L Sheley, Tony J. Svejcar. 
2006. Toward ecologically-based invasive plant 
 
 
management on rangeland. Weed Sci. 54:597-605.  
McArthur, E.D., A.C. Blauer, A.P. Plummer, and R. 
 
 
 
 
McArthur, E.D., S.E. Meyer, and D.J. Weber. 1987. 
 
 
  Manage. 40:530-533.  
McArthur, E.D. and J.R. Taylor. 2004. Chrysothamnus 
nauseosus (Pallas ex Pursh) Britton, Asteraceae. In 
 
 
J.K. Francis [ed.] Wildland shrubs of the United 
 
States and its territories: thamnic descriptions: vol 1. 
USDA Forest Service General Tech. Rep. IITF-GTR-
 
 
26. Fort Collins, CO.  
Meyer, S.E., E.D. McArthur, and G.L. Jorgensen. 1989. 
 
Variation in germination response to temperature in 
rubber rabbitbrush (Chrysothamnus nauseosus: 
 
Asteraceae) and its ecological implications. Amer. J. 
 
 
Bot. 76:981-991.  
Ogle, D., J. Cane, F. Fink, L. St. John, M. Stannard. 2007. 
 
 
 

Stevens. 1979. Characteristics and hybridization of 
important Intermountain shrubs. III. Sunflower 
family. USDA INTMTN. Forest and Range Exp. Sta. 
Res. Paper INT-220.  

Plants for pollinators in the Intermountain West. 
Plant Materials Tech. Note No. 2. USDA-NRCS. 
Boise, ID; Salt Lake City, UT and Spokane, WA.  

Germination rate at low temperature: rubber 
rabbitbrush population differences. J. of Range 

green and gray rubber rabbitbrush and their 
establishment on coal mined land. J. of Range 

Viability of seed from thrity-two shrub and forb 
species through fifteen years of warehouse storage. 
Great Basin Naturalist 41:274-277. 

Effects Information System. [Online] Available at 
http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/. (accessed 15 Dec 
2009). USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Res. 
Sta., Fire Sci. Lab.  

Ogle, D., L. St. John, M. Stannard, L. Holzworth. 2009 
revision. Grass, grass-like, forb, legume, and woody 
 
 
species for the Intermountain West. Plant Materials 
Tech. Note No. 24. USDA-NRCS. Boise, ID; 
 
 
Bozeman, MT and Spokane, WA.  
Romo, J.T. and L.E. Eddleman. 1988. Germination of 
 
 
  Manage. 41:491-495.  
Stevens, R., K.R. Jorgensen, and J.N. Davis. 1981. 
 
 
 
Stubbendieck, J., S.L. Hatch, L.M. Landholt. 2003. North 
 
American wildland plants. Lincoln, NE and London.  
Tirmenstein, D. 1999. Chrysothamnus nauseosus. In: Fire 
 
 
 
 
USDA, NRCS. 2009. The PLANTS Database [Online] 
 
 
Utah Native Plant Society. [Online] Available at 
 
 
Whisenant, S. 1988. Control of threadleaf rubber 
 
 
 
Prepared By  
Pamela L. Scheinost, USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Pullman, Washington  
Joe Scianna, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Bridger, Montana  
Daniel G. Ogle, USDA NRCS State Office, Boise, Idaho  
 
Citation  
Scheinost, P.L., J. Scianna, D.G. Ogle. 2010. Plant guide 
for rubber rabbitbrush (Ericameria nauseosa). USDA-
Natural Resources Conservation Service, Pullman Plant 
Materials Center, Pullman, WA.  

http://www.unps.org/ (accessed 14 Dec 2009). Utah 
Native Plant Society.  

rabbitbrush with herbicides. J. of Range Manage. 
41:470-472.  

Available at http://plants.usda.gov (accessed 14 Dec 
2009). National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, LA.  

Published May, 1998 

Edited: 05Jan2010 dgo; 05Jan2010 js; 06Jan2010 pls; 
04Feb2010 jb 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

 

