Plant Guide 

Natural Resources Conservation Service 
VIRGIN RIVER BRITTLEBUSH 
Encelia virginensis (A. Gray) 

Plant Symbol = ENVI 

Alternative scientific names:  
Encelia frutescens (A. Gray) A. Gray var. virginensis (A. Nelson) S.F. Blake 
Encelia virginensis A. Nelson var. virginensis 
Encelia virginensis var actonii (Elmer) B.L. Turner. 

Description 
General:  Virgin River brittlebush is a native evergreen shrub up to three feet 
high and three feet wide with many slender branching stems growing from the 
base. Younger stems are hairy, while older stems may have fissured bark. 
Leaves are oval, simple, 0.5 to 1 inch long, with a smooth margin. Short, soft 
hairs give the leaves a grayish green appearance. Leaf arrangement is alternate 
and opposite. Flowers heads are borne singly on hairy stems and have yellow 
ray flowers less than 0.5 inches long, and yellow to orange disk flowers. The 
blooming period is typically March through June. The fruit is a dark brown to 
black achene, 0.2 to 0.3 inches long. Virgin River brittlebush is distinguished 
from other Encelia species by its smaller mature plant size, smaller leaves, 
and the presence of both ray and disk flowers (Abrams, 1923; Baldwin et al., 2002; Kiel & Clark, 2016; Univ. of Arizona, 
2016). 

Virgin River brittlebush, Photo by Heather Dial, USDA 
NRCS Tucson Plant Materials Center 

Distribution:  Virgin River brittlebush is found in California, Nevada, Utah, Arizona, New Mexico, and Baja California. 
Please refer to the PLANTS Database for the most current map of species distribution. 

Habitat:  Virgin River brittlebush inhabits desert scrub between the elevations of 1,500-5,000 ft. on desert flats, rocky slopes, 
and roadsides. 

Adaptation:  Virgin River brittlebush is found in the Mojave Desert. Associated plants include creosote bush (Larrea 
tridentata), Joshua tree (Yucca brevifolia), Mojave yucca (Yucca schidigera), Mormon tea (Ephedra viridis), and white 
bursage (Ambrosia dumosa) (Kiel & Clark, 2016; United States Department of Agriculture, 2006). 

Uses 
Range Revegetation:  Virgin River brittlebush can be used in the revegetation of disturbed areas. Rodgers (1994) found that 
when outplanted as container stock, Virgin River brittlebush had a greater than 90% survival rate on an abandoned strip mine 
site in Joshua Tree National Monument. 
Pollinator Habitat:  Virgin River brittlebush provides a nectar source for native bees and butterflies. At the Tucson 
Plant Materials center, Western pygmy-blue butterflies (Brephidium exilis) were observed foraging on the flower 
heads. 
Ethnobotanical:  Native American people used Virgin River brittlebush as a medicine. The Kawaiisu made a decoction of
the leaves and flowers which they used as a wash for reducing rheumatic pains. This decoction was also used to treat cuts and 
bruises on horses (Zigmond, 1981). The Tubatulabal made a decoction of the roots for use as a wash for rheumatism 
(Voegelin, 1938). 

Status 
Threatened or Endangered:  No. 

Wetland Indicator:  UPL 
Weedy or Invasive:  This plant may become weedy or invasive in some regions or habitats, and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service office, 
state natural resource, or state agriculture department regarding its status or use. 

 

Planting Guidelines 
The recommended seeding rate for Virgin River brittlebush is 1 pure live seed (PLS) pounds per acre if planted with a drill 
and approximately 2 PLS pounds if seed is broadcast. There are approximately 217,000 seeds of Virgin River brittlebush in a 
pound (Kay et al., 1977). For ornamental establishment, sow Virgin River brittlebush seed to a depth of ¼ inch. For 
containerized production, sow seed to a depth of ¼ inch in a well-drained soil. 

Pests and Potential Problems 
The chrysanthemum lace bug (Corythucha marmorata) can be a pest of Virgin River brittlebush. At the Tucson Plant 
Materials Center, infestations of this insect killed immature plants and prevented seed production in mature plants. 

Environmental Concerns 
None 

Seeds and Plant Production 
Plant Virgin River brittlebush in the early spring into a firm, weed-free 
seedbed at a ¼ to ½ inch depth with 24-40 inches within-row spacing. Row 
spacing can vary from 36-40 inches. Irrigate the planting to maintain a moist 
soil surface and to avoid soil crusting. Control weeds with appropriate pre-
emergent herbicide after the plants have developed at least 3-5 leaves. 
Irrigate established fields approximately every four weeks during the 
growing season. Apply nutrients according to soil test results. Plants will 
produce seed from spring to fall when fields are irrigated. Harvest timing is 
critical, as seed is easily blown from the plant after maturity (Kay et al., 
1977). Harvest seed with a seed stripper or combine. Clean harvested seed by 
processing with a brush machine or hammer mill and air screening 
equipment. 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials  
These plant materials are not readily available from commercial sources. 
 
Literature Cited 
Abrams, L. 1923. An Illustrated Flora of the Pacific States: Washington, Oregon, and California. Stanford University Press, 

Virgin River brittlebush plot, Photo by Heather Dial, 
USDA NRCS Tucson Plant Materials Center 

Palo Alto, CA. 

Baldwin, B.G., S. Boyd, B.J. Ertter, R.W. Patterson, T.J. Rosatti, and D.H. Wilken (ed). 2002. The Jepson Desert Manual: 

Vascular Plants of Southeastern California. Univ. of California Press, Berkeley, CA. 

Kay, B.L., C.R. Brown, and W.L. Graves. 1977. Virgin River encelia. Mojave Reveg. Notes 4. University of California 

Keil, D.J. & C. Clark 2016. Encelia virginensis, in Jepson Flora Project (eds.) Jepson eFlora, http://ucjeps.berkeley.edu/cgi-

Department of Agronomy and Range Science, Davis, CA. 

bin/get_IJM.pl?tid=2561 (accessed on June 22, 2016). 

Rodgers, J. 1994. Use of Container Stock in Mine Revegetation. In: Landis, T.D.; Dumroese, R.K., tech. cords. National 

Proceedings, Forest and Conservation Nursery Associations.  Gen. Tech. Rep.  RM-257. Fort Collins, Co: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station: 234-238. 

USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database, http://plants.usda.gov/core/profile?symbol=ENVI 
United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service. 2006. Land Resource Regions and Major 

Land Resource Areas of the United States, the Caribbean, and the Pacific Basin. U.S. Department of Agriculture 
Handbook 296. 

University of Arizona Cooperative Extension. Yavapai County Native & Naturalized 

Plants, http://cals.arizona.edu/yavapaiplants/SpeciesDetail.php?genus=Encelia&species=virginensis (accessed June 23, 
2016).  

Voegelin, E.W. 1938. Tubatulabal Ethnography. Anthropological Records 2(1): 1-84, p. 59. 
Zigmond, M.L. 1981. Kawaiisu Ethnobotany. University of Utah Press, Salt Lake City, UT.  
 
Citation 
Wolf, M. 2016. Plant Guide for Virgin River brittlebush (Encelia virginensis). USDA-Natural Resources Conservation 
Service, Tucson Plant Materials Center. Tucson, AZ 85705. 
 
Published September 2016  

 

For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation District 
at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant Materials Program Web 
site: 
http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability of other Web sites. 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination against its customers, employees, and applicants for 
employment on the bases of race, color, national origin, age, disability, sex, gender identity, religion, reprisal, and where applicable, 
political beliefs, marital status, familial or parental status, sexual orientation, or all or part of an individual's income is derived from 
any public assistance program, or protected genetic information in employment or in any program or activity conducted or 
funded by the Department. (Not all prohibited bases will apply to all programs and/or employment activities.) 
 
If you wish to file an employment complaint, you must contact your agency's EEO Counselor (PDF) within 45 days of the date 
of the alleged discriminatory act, event, or in the case of a personnel action. Additional information can be found online 
at http://www.ascr.usda.gov/complaint_filing_file.html. 
 
If you wish to file a Civil Rights program complaint of discrimination, complete the USDA Program Discrimination Complaint 
Form (PDF), found online at http://www.ascr.usda.gov/complaint_filing_cust.html, or at any USDA office, or call (866) 632-
9992 to request the form. You may also write a letter containing all of the information requested in the form. Send your 
completed complaint form or letter to us by mail at U.S. Department of Agriculture, Director, Office of Adjudication, 1400 
Independence Avenue, S.W., Washington, D.C. 20250-9410, by fax (202) 690-7442 or email at program.intake@usda.gov. 
Individuals who are deaf, hard of hearing or have speech disabilities and you wish to file either an EEO or program complaint 
please contact USDA through the Federal Relay Service at (800) 877-8339 or (800) 845-6136 (in Spanish). 
 
Persons with disabilities who wish to file a program complaint, please see information above on how to contact us by mail directly 
or by email. If you require alternative means of communication for program information (e.g., Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) 
please contact USDA's TARGET Center at (202) 720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
 
For any other information dealing with Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) issues, persons should either contact 
the USDA SNAP Hotline Number at (800) 221-5689, which is also in Spanish or call the State Information/Hotline Numbers. 
For any other information not pertaining to civil rights, please refer to the listing of the USDA Agencies and Offices for specific 
agency information. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER, EMPLOYER, AND LENDER 

Helping People Help the Land 

