 
 

 

Plant Guide

erosion.  The Texas Parks and Wildlife Department has 
given Engelmann’s daisy a “good” rating due to an 
erosion index of 5.24 (TPWD, 2009). 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation 
if not properly managed.  Please consult with your local 
NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service 
office, state natural resource, or state agriculture 
department regarding its status and use.  Weed 
information is also available from the PLANTS Web site 
at plants.usda.gov.  Please consult the Related Web Sites 
on the Plant Profile for this species for further 
information. 
 
Description 
General:  Engelmann’s daisy is a native, cool-season 
perennial which can grow up to three feet tall.  The plant 
produces a basal rosette of leaves that can grow eight 
inches long.  Leaves are very deeply cleft or almost 
divided.  Coarse hair can be found on both the leaves and 
stems of the plant.  The vegetation remains green 
throughout the year with new growth beginning in the 
spring (Hatch, 1993).  The flower head elongates during 
the spring months.  Engelmann’s daisy flower heads are 
made up of eight yellow rays, each ray about 1 cm long 
(Correll, 1970).  They measure one to two inches in 
diameter.  Flowering occurs from April to November 
(Rickett, 1969). During extreme heat, the petals of the 
plant fold downward.  Engelmann’s daisy reproduces 
from seed which is distributed by wind and birds (TPWD, 
2009). Volunteer plants can also be found in areas where 
plants were previously grown and the soil has been 
disturbed (USDA SCS, 1970). 
 
Distribution:  Engelmann’s daisy is most commonly 
found throughout north central Texas and the Edward’s 
Plateau.  It is also found as far north as South Dakota, as 
far west as Arizona, and as far east as Louisiana (USDA 
NRCS, 2009). 
For current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Habitat: Engelmann’s daisy can be seen growing 
throughout much of Texas with the exception of the piney 
woods area.  Its main habitat is areas such as prairies, 
upland sites, and open roadways (Hatch, 1993). 

ENGELMANN’S DAISY 
Engelmannia peristenia (Raf.) 

Goodman & C.A. Lawson 

Plant Symbol = ENPE4 

 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS James E. “Bud” Smith 
Plant Materials Center, Knox City, Texas 

USDA NRCS 2009 

 1 

Alternate Names 
Cutleaf daisy 
 
Uses 
Livestock:  Engelmann’s daisy is rarely found on 
overgrazed pastures due to its palatability by livestock 
(Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center, 2010).  Cattle, 
sheep, and goats can all benefit from the high protein and 
digestibility obtained from this species.  Crude protein 
can reach as high as twenty-five percent in early spring 
(TPWD, 2009).  Engelmann’s daisy is an important food 
plot during the winter and early spring, before other 
native plants have begun to initiate growth (USDA SCS, 
1970). 
 
Wildlife:  Deer and rabbits will browse on the foliage of 
Engelmann’s daisy (Agrilife, 2009).  Like livestock, 
wildlife can use the high protein earlier in the year before 
the warm season grasses initiate growth.  Engelmann’s 
daisy has a wildlife index value of 3.59.  This gives it a 
“fair” rating for wildlife use (TPWD, 2009).  Dense 
foliage will also provide cover for small mammals and 
birds.  Engelmann’s daisy flowers provide nectar to a 
wide variety of pollinators including bees, butterflies, and 
hummingbirds (Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center, 
2010). 
 
Erosion Control:  Engelmann’s daisy is used on slopes, 
such as roadsides and embankments, to help reduce soil 

 

Adaptation 
Engelmann’s daisy is adapted to a wide range of soil 
types and climate conditions, but is found most frequently 
throughout central and west Texas (USDA SCS, 1970).  
Ideal soil types range from sandy loams to clay loams.  
Engelmann’s daisy does not tolerate heavy clay soils, 
salinity, or deep sands.  The plant has a deep tap root 
which makes it a hardy, drought tolerate species (TPWD, 
2009). 
 
Establishment 
Planting should be done in the fall for areas south of 
Dallas and Fort Worth. In areas north, planting in later 
winter or early spring is the best time (USDA SCS, 1970).  
Sow seed ¼ to ¾ of an inch deep in a well prepared, firm 
seedbed.  The full seeding rate for Engelmann’s daisy is 
15 lb pure live seed (pls) per acre.  When planting this as 
a component of a seed mixture, the seeding rate should be 
adjusted to the desired percent of the mix.  Ideal plant 
spacing would be two to three plants per square yard.  
Fertilizer applications will vary depending on individual 
soil conditions.  Soil samples should be taken to 
determine adequate application rates.  Nutrient levels 
should be at a medium range for optimal productivity.  
For range seedings, fertilizer is not normally 
recommended (USDA SCS, 1979) 
 
Management 
Engelmann’s daisy is rarely planted as a monoculture 
planting, but is commonly found as a component of a 
range seeding mixture.  Twelve months of grazing 
deferment should be planned and applied to allow plant 
establishment.  Areas with heavy wildlife populations 
should also consider the impact and added maintenance 
associated with attempting to establish Engelmann’s 
daisy. 
Proper management of Engelmann’s daisy is required to 
ensure the plant is not overgrazed or over utilized by 
livestock and wildlife.  Consult your local NRCS Field 
Office for assistance with planning and applying 
prescribed grazing. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
None known 
 
Environmental Concerns 
None known 
 
Control 
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use it safely.  Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method.  Trade names 
and control measures appear in this document only to 
provide specific information.  USDA NRCS does not 
guarantee or warranty the products and control methods 
named, and other products may be equally effective. 

 

 

of the Vascular Plants of Texas.  Texas Research 
Foundation, Renner, TX, 1970.  p. 1625. 

Plants.  Texas A&M University Press, College 
Station, TX.  1993.  p. 241. 

Seeds and Plant Production  
Seed can be harvested by several different methods. One 
is to use a flail-vac or seed stripper to brush seed into a 
hopper. The other is by cutting plants down to about six 
inches and allowing them to dry.  Then use a combine 
with a pickup header attachment to harvest and thresh 
seed. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
‘Eldorado’ Engelmann’s daisy was released from the 
James E. “Bud” Smith Plant Materials Center, Knox City, 
TX in 1985.  It originated from a native collection in 
Schleicher County, TX, and was released to provide an 
adapted forb for inclusion in range mixes for wildlife and 
livestock. 
 
References 
Correll, Donovan S. and Marshall C. Johnston.  Manual 
 
 
Hatch, Stephan L. and Jennifer Pluhar.  Texas Range 
 
 
Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center.  The University of 
  Texas at Austin.  2010.  Native Plant Information 
  Network. Available at 
 
 
 
Research and Extension Center Virtual Herbarium.  Texas 
  AgriLife Research and Extension at Uvalde.  2009.  
  Texas A&M University.  Available at 
http://uvalde.tamu.edu/herbarium/enpe.htm 19 June 
 
 
2009.  College Station, TX.  Accessed 19 June 2009. 
Rickett, Harold W.  Wild Flowers of the United States.  
  Volume 3 Part Two of Two Parts.  McGraw-Hill Book 
  Company.  New York, New York.  1969.  p. 455. 
Texas Parks and Wildlife:  Texas Plant Information 
  Database.  2009.  Texas Parks and Wildlife.  Available 
 
 
 
  Accessed 19 June 2009 
USDA NRCS.  2009.  The PLANTS Database 
 
  Data Center, Baton Rouge, LA, 70874-4490, USA. 
USDA SCS.  1979.  Planting Guide for Engelmann’s 
 
USDA SCS.  1970.  Technical Notes:  Engelmann’s daisy 
 
  Texas. 
Prepared By 
Brandon Carr, USDA NRCS James E. “Bud” Smith Plant 
Materials Center, Knox City, Texas 
 
 

http://www.wildflower.org/plants/result.php?id_plant
=ENPE4  Austin, TX, 78739, USA.  Accessed 2 Feb. 
2010. 

at 
http://tpid.tpwd.state.tx.us/species_report.asp?species
=190 19 June 2009.)  Austin, TX, 78744, USA.  

(http://plants.usda.gov 20 June 2009.)  National Plant 

daisy (Engelmannia pinnatifida).  June 1979.   

(Engelmannia pinnatifida).  May 1970.  Fort Worth, 

Citation 
Carr, C. 2010. Plant guide for Engelmann’s Daisy 
(Engelmannia peristenia). USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, James E. “Bud” Smith Plant 
Materials Center. Knox City, TX  79529. 

Published September, 2010 

Edited: 21Jul2010bc 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

