 
 

 

Plant Guide

Wildlife and Conservation  
Virginia wildrye is palatable and nutritious forage for 
large game animals such as deer. Birds and small 
mammals also forage for the seed and utilize the plant 
fibers for denning and nesting material (National Plant 
Information Network, 2009). The seed is reported to be 
utilized by mallard and lesser scaup ducks when found in 
association with wetlands, and Canada geese will graze 
young foliage (Hilty, 2009).  
Virginia wildrye may be mixed with warm season grasses 
for restoration and conservation plantings, and provides 
an important cool season component to seed mixtures.  
 
Status  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
 
Description  
General:  
Virginia wildrye is a native, cool season, perennial, bunch 
grass. It is similar to Canada wildrye (Elymus canadensis) 
in appearance, but is typically shorter in height with 
shorter awns on the seed head. The seed heads are more 
erect than those of Canada wildrye which typically bow 
or droop (Philips Petroleum Company, 1963). There is 
evidence of variation in E. virginicus and E. canadensis 
due to hybridization of the two species (Grelen and 
Hughes, 1984). It reaches approximately three feet in 
height, lacks rhizomes and reproduces by seed and tillers.  
 
Seed heads are typically 3 to 6 inches in length, erect, and 
have numerous, coarse awns. Each spikelet has 2 or more 
florets that decrease in size as they extend to the end of 
the inflorescence. The glumes bow outward at the base 
producing a “U” shape and are strongly nerved (Hatch et 
al., 1993). The spiklets are densely packed on the 
inflorescence. They are sessile, have a pair of glumes with 
a cluster of 2 to 4 lemmas, and their florets (Hilty, 2009). 
Virginia wildrye blooms in the spring from March 
through May, and is wind pollinated (Hilty, 2009).  
 
Color may vary from green to silvery blue, and foliage 
often has a waxy appearance. The culms are tufted, 
strictly erect, or decumbent at the base. The ligule is a 
minute, truncated membrane (Gould, 1975). The 
alternately arranged leaves are approximately 12 inches in 
length and 2/3 inch in width. Virginia wildrye is typically 
hairless, but may have short pubescent on the leaf sheaths 
(Hilty, 2009). 
 
 

 

VIRGINIA WILDRYE 

Elymus virginicus L.  

Plant Symbol = ELVI3 

Contributed by:  USDA NRCS PMC or State PM 
Program 

 R. 

Alan Shadow  
USDA NRCS East Texas Plant Materials Center  
 
 Alternate Names  
Wildrye  
 
Uses  
Livestock:  
Virginia wildrye is palatable and nutritious to all classes 
of livestock. It may be grazed fall through early spring 
before it produces its characteristic, awned, seed head. It 
may also be cut for hay; however, grazing and haying 
should be deferred after the plant goes to seed. The seed 
heads are often heavily infected with ergot which causes 
toxicity problems in livestock (Phillips Petroleum 
Company, 1963). Proper management is needed to avoid 
selective grazing by livestock. Selective grazing weakens 
the stand and can lead to its elimination.  

 

Distribution:  
Virginia wildrye has a very broad distribution, a testament 
to its adaptability. It may be found throughout the eastern 
2/3rds of the United States, as far west as Arizona, and in 
the entire southern half of Canada. For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site (http://plants.usda.gov).  
 
Habitat:  
Virginia wildrye is shade tolerant and is equally at home 
in open grasslands and prairies as it is in wooded sites. It 
is more shade tolerant than Canada wildrye, and prefers 
soils with more moisture and fertility (Philips Petroleum 
Company, 1963). It is commonly found in moist sites 
such as wet prairies, margins of wetlands, ditches, and 
riparian areas. It is also commonly found in woodlands, 
especially those in association with flood plains. It will 
adapt to disturbances and can be found in areas such as 
forest cut-overs (Hilty, 2009).  
 
Adaptation  
Virginia wildrye will tolerate a wide range of soil 
textures, from coarse sands to heavy clay. It prefers 
heavier soils with moderate fertility and a pH between 5 
and 7. It has a moderate tolerance of drought and low 
tolerance of burning (Grelen and Hughes, 1984). It will 
not tolerate saline conditions. It can survive temperatures 
down to negative 23oF. Virginia wildrye requires at least 
36 inches of rain annually, and a minimum of 130 frost 
free days to reach maturity and produce seed (NRCS, 
2009).  
 
Establishment  
The seed requires no stratification or treatment, and 
typically produce greater than 85% germination (NRCS, 
2009). For best results, prepare a clean, firm, weed free 
seedbed by disking, harrowing, and firming the seedbed 
with a cultipacker or roller prior to establishment. Rain or 
irrigation may also be used to settle and firm the field. If 
possible, allow an initial flush of weeds before planting, 
and treat with a non selective, broad spectrum herbicide 
such as glyphosate in the 2-4 leaf stage. This will help 
reduce early weed pressure, and maybe done multiple 
times before planting if severe weed competition is 
anticipated.  
 
Seed should be planted in or early fall approximately ¼ to 
½ inch deep in heavy soils, and up to 1 inch deep in sandy 
soils (NRCS, 2009). Adequate soil moisture is critical for 
establishment of healthy stands. Seed should be drilled at 
10-15 pure live seed (PLS) pounds per acre or broadcast 
at 20 PLS pounds per acre, when a monoculture is 
desired. Mixtures should be adjusted accordingly based 
on the desired concentration of plants.  
 
Management  
New plantings should not be fertilized during their first 
year of establishment. Fertilization at this time promotes 

 

 

weed competition. Established stands maybe fertilized 
according to current soil test recommendations.  
Warm season annual grasses can be very competitive in 
young plantings. However, their competitiveness is 
greatly reduced as temperatures cool, favoring the cool 
season Virginia wildrye. If they become a problem during 
early establishment, they may be controlled using 
cultivation and mowing. Mowing above the Virginia 
wildrye will reduce the leaf area of taller weeds, making 
them less competitive, and can destroy weed seed before 
it reaches maturity. Cultivation is useful in seed 
production settings to control weeds between rows. Avoid 
deep cultivation as it decreases soil moisture and brings 
new weed seed to the surface to germinate.  
 
A wick applicator filled with a 50% glyphosate mixture is 
effective for tall weeds. Attach the wick applicator to an 
ATV or tractor and drive slowly through the planting with 
the wick positioned at a height to provide maximum 
control of target weeds, but above the Virginia wildrye 
plants.  
 
Broadleaf weeds may be controlled with selective 
herbicides such as 2, 4-D amine. Applications of post 
emergent herbicides should be done while weeds are 
young and not under stress such as drought. Pre-emergent 
herbicides are useful as broad spectrum weed control in 
established stands, but their use may only be applicable in 
monotypic stands and seed production situations.  
 
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use it safely. Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method. Trade names 
and control measures appear in this document only to 
provide specific information. USDA NRCS does not 
guarantee or warranty the products and control methods 
named, and other products may be equally effective. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems  
Several species of insects feed on Virginia wildrye 
including the leafhoppers (Dorycephalus platyrhynchus, 
Elymana acrita, Elymana acuma and (Laevicephalus 
orientalis).Leaf hoppers suck juices from the foliage and 
create stress on the plant. The flea beetle (Chaetocnema 
pulicaria,), leaf beetle (Chalepus walshii) and the 
caterpillars of the False Wainscot moth (Leucania 
pseudoargyria) will feed on the foliage. Stink bugs are 
also known to feed on Virginia wildrye. These include 
Brown Stink Bugs (Euschistus servus), green stink bug 
(Chinavia hilare, Coenus delia), and rough stink bug 
(Brochymena quadripustulata) (Hilty, 2009). White grub 
worms are also know to cause damage and should be 
controlled with a labeled pesticide when they are most 
active in late spring and early summer (NRCS, 2009).  
Seed heads can become heavily infestation with ergot 
which causes toxicity problems in livestock (Phillips 
Petroleum Company, 1963). Virginia wildrye’s forage 
value decreases as it matures. When managed properly, it 

is baled at its nutritional peak, well before seed 
production; therefore, ergot should not be a problem.  
Elymus species are known to hybridize readily with one 
another (Gould, 1975). This may create potential 
problems in a seed production setting with isolation 
requirements when more than one specie or subspecies is 
produced, or when natural populations exist in close 
proximity to production fields.  
 
Seed must be awn free to flow through most drills and 
planters. Awned seed can bridge and clog planter tubes. 
When ordering seed make sure it is awn free, or the 
equipment being used is compatible with awned seed 
(NRCS, 2009).  
 
Environmental Concerns  
There are no known negative environmental concerns 
with this species.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
Kinchafoonee Germplasm was released in 2004 through 
the Jimmy Carter Plant Materials Center in Georgia as a 
cool season cover crop and for stabilization of critical 
areas.  
 
Northern Missouri Germplasm was released in 1999 
through the Elsberry Plant Materials Center in Elsberry, 
Missouri for planting in riparian areas, soil stabilization, 
forage, wildlife food and cover, and prairie plantings.  
Cuivre River Germplasm was released in 2002 from the 
Elsberry Plant Materials Center for use as a companion 
species for forage production and erosion control. It may 
also be used in a mono culture or part of a seed mix for 
vegetative buffers, filters, wildlife forage and cover, plant 
diversity in wetland and riparian plantings, and a cover 
crop for woody plantings.  
 
‘Omaha’ was developed by Stock Seed Company in 
Murdock, Nebraska for us as cool season forage and 
conservation plantings such buffers, filters, and 
restoration plantings.  
 
References  
Phillips Petroleum Company. 1963. Pasture and Range 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hilty, J. 2002-2009. Illinois Wildflowers. 
 
 
 

Plants. Bartlesville, Oklahoma.  
Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center The 
University of Texas at Austin. 2009. Native Plant 
Information Network 
(http://www.wildflower.org/plants/result.php?id_p
lant=ELVI3 Accessed 27 July 2009). Austin, TX. 
78739 USA.  

(http://www.illinoiswildflowers.info/grasses/plants
/va_rye.htm . Accessed 27 July 2009). Dr. John 
Hilty, Illinois.  

 

 
 

 

University Press, College Station.  

(http://plants.usda.gov, 27 July 2009). National Plant 
Data Center, Baton Rouge, LA 70874-4490 USA.  

herbaceous plants of southern forest range. Res. 
Paper SO-210. USDA, Forest Service, Southern 
Forest Exp. Stn., New Orleans, LA.  

Grelen, H.E., and R.H. Hughes. 1984. Common 
 
 
 
Hatch, S. L. and Pluhar, J. 1993. Texas Range Plants. 
 
Texas A&M University Press, College Station.  
Gould, F.W. 1975. The Grasses of Texas. Texas A&M 
 
USDA, NRCS. 2009. The PLANTS Database 
 
 
USDA, NRCS Plant Material Program 1997.  
 
 
 
 
 
  Materials Center, Americus, Georgia. 31709. USA.  
 
Prepared By  
R. Alan Shadow, USDA NRCS East Texas Plant 
Materials Center  
 
Species Coordinator  

Planting Guide ‘Kinchafoonee’ Virginia Wildrye 
Selected Class of Natural Germplasm. 
(http://www.plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov/pubs/gapmcpg5458.pdf. 
Accessed27 July 2009). Jimmy Carter Plant 

Published October, 2009 
Edited: 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

