 
 

 

Plant Guide

Distribution: 
Plains Lovegrass occurs from eastern California to 
Florida, north into Missouri and south into scattered 
locations of Central America. For updated distribution, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species on 
the PLANTS Web site. 
For current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Habitat: Plains Lovegrass is common in the desert 
grasslands of southern Arizona, the interior chaparral of 
Arizona and mixed-grass and short grass prairie of the 
southwest USA. It often grows in areas where annual 
precipitation is bimodal, with wet seasons in both winter 
and summer. The bulk of the forage is produced in the 
summer months. In areas where plains Lovegrass grows 
productively, mean annual precipitation usually exceeds 
15 inches. 
 
Adaptation  
Plains Lovegrass occurs on clay, sandy and rocky soils 
and often on disturbed sites, at 0 to 6069 feet elevation. In 
southern Arizona, it is most productive on sandy and 
sandy loam soils with poorly developed profiles, and least 
productive on shallow, rocky soils, at 3,800 to 6,000 feet 
elevation. 
 
Establishment 
Seed of Plains Lovegrass is reddish-brown, rectangular-
prismatic in shape, and very small (3,386,000 per lb).  
Natural dispersal occurs when the fruiting stalks detach 
and tumble across the ground, releasing seed.  
 
Recommended seeding rate is 0.3 pure live seed (PLS) lb 
per acre if planted with a drill, and approximately 0.6 PLS 
lb per acre if seed is broadcast. When used as part of a 
mix the seeding rate should be adjusted to the desired 
percentage of the mixture. Due to the small seed size use 
of a carrier, such as rice hulls, should be considered to 
obtain better control of the seeding rate.  Seed should be 
planted onto a firm, weed-free seedbed.  Broadcast 
seeding should be followed lightly with a cultipacker or 
harrow to provide seed with a shallow covering of soil.   
 
Management 
Due to its high seed stalk to leaf ratio, this species is only 
intermediate in forage preference to cattle. However, it is 
often heavily grazed because it is one of the first species 
to green up in the spring. Where grazing occurs, it often 
declines. Because of its importance as an early spring 
forage plant, ranges where this species is still present 
should be managed in order to preserve or increase it. 
These ranges should be deferred from grazing during July 

PLAINS LOVEGRASS 
Eragrostis intermedia A.S. Hitchc. 

Plant Symbol = ERIN 

 
Contributed by: NRCS USDA Tucson Plant Materials 
Center 

 

Plains Lovegrass reflects a pink hue in the mixed grasslands of 
Southeast Arizona. 
 
Alternate Names 
Plains Lovegrass 
 
Uses 
Forage: Important early spring forage grass for livestock 
and wildlife. Its seeds are eaten by upland game birds. 
Restoration: Establishes well following fire (Bock et al 
2009). 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General: Plains Lovegrass is a native, warm season 
perennial bunchgrass. Plains Lovegrass typically grows 2 
to 3 ½ feet tall.  The inflorescence is an erect, open, 
diffuse, pyramid-shaped panicle 8 to 16 inches long and 
6-12 inches wide. The spikelets have 3 to 9 flowers 
(Hitchcock 1951). The fresh inflorescence is pinkish in 
color. 
 

 

 

Gould, F.W. 1977.  Grasses of Southwestern United 

States. University of Arizona Press, Tucson, Arizona. 
85716. 

Hitchcock, A.S. 1951. Manual of the Grasses of the 

United States. Misc. Publ. No. 200. Washington, DC; 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural 
Research Administration. 

Kearney, T.H., and R.H. Peebles. 1969. Arizona flora. 
University of California Press, Berkeley, California. 

Prepared By  
Mary Hershdorfer, NRCS USDA Tucson Plant Materials 
Center 
 
Citation 
Hershdorfer, M. 2009. Plant guide for plains lovegrass 
(Eragrostis intermedia A.S. Hitchc.). USDA Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Tucson Plant Materials 
Center, Tucson, AZ  85705. 

Published October, 2009 

Edited:  

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

and August every third year, if possible (Ruyle and 
Young 1997). 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Plains Lovegrass is at risk of overgrazing, and should be 
managed where grazing occurs. 
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Plains Lovegrass should be planted in early spring into a 
firm, weed-free seedbed at 24 to 40” spacing.   Plants 
require 30 lb/acre available nitrogen during the 
establishment year and 45 lb/ac available nitrogen on 
established fields. Apply phosphorus according to soil test 
recommendations. For establishment, irrigate to maintain 
a moist soil surface and to avoid soil crusting. On 
established fields irrigate approximately every 4 weeks 
during the growing season. 
 
Seed is produced from summer to fall. Seed harvest may 
be done by direct combining or using a Woodward Flail 
Vac Seed Stripper.  Yields for irrigated production fields 
average 180 lb per acre, but may vary from year to year. 
Seed from Plains Lovegrass has very good viability. 
 
Seed with attached rachillas may be put through a 
hammer mill to break up stems and remove seedheads 
from the rachillas.  Seed may then be separated from the 
chaff using an office type Clipper cleaner with 11/32 top 
screen and 60x60 bottom screen. Little to no blower is 
needed.   
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
Bonita Germplasm (Eragrostis intermedia) Plains 
Lovegrass is a selected class release developed by the 
NRCS USDA Tucson Plant Materials Center for 
Southeast Arizona Major Land Resource Area (MLRA 
41). MLRA 41 corresponds to Level 3 Ecoregion 79. It is 
a composite of 30 accessions collected from native plains 
Lovegrass stands in Southeast Arizona and Southwest 
New Mexico. 
 
References 
Bock, Carl, J. Bock, M. Grant, T. Seastedt. 2009. Effects 

of fire on abundance of Eragrostis intermedia in a 
semi-arid grassland in southwestern Arizona. Journal 
of Vegetation Science, 6(3):325-328.  

Ruyle, G. and D. Young, Eds. 1997. Arizona range 

grasses: their description, forage value and grazing 
management. University of Arizona Cooperative 
Extension. College of Agriculture. Tucson, Arizona. 
85716. 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

