 
 

 

Plant Guide

Wildlife - Rough fescue is an important source of 
forage for mule deer and bighorn sheep. It is used by 
elk on winter ranges (Jourdonnais and Bedunah 
1986), although, elk will avoid plants with large 
amounts of old litter. Sharp-tailed grouse often nest 
under clumps of rough fescue in northwestern 
Montana (Giesen and Connelly 1993). 

Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Description 
General: Grass family (Poaceae).  Rough fescue is a 
native, perennial, cool-season bunchgrass.  Individual 
rough fescue plants often form large-diameter 
bunches averaging 12 – 14 inches in diameter, 
sometimes as large as 2 feet.   Festuca campestris 
culms are erect, 1 to 4.5 ft. tall, glabrous, scabrous, 
naked below the panicle, and purplish at the base.  
Leaves are basal 12-30 inches long, 0.03-0.08 inches 
in diameter, folded, mostly erect, stiff, and pointed. 
Lower surface of the leaves are often scabrous.  
Sheaths are closed for less than 1/3 their length and 
are often persistent.  Inflorescences are panicles, 
generally 3.5-7 inches long, open or loosely 
contracted, with usually 2 branches per node. The 
branches are erect to stiffly spreading.  Spikelets are 
0.3-0.5 inches long and have 3-7 florets. Glumes are 
exceeded by the upper most florets. Lemmas are 
0.25-0.40 inches long with either a sharp point or 
short awn ( Anderton and Barkworth 2009, 
Stubbendieck, Hatch, and Landholt 2003).  In the fall 
mountain rough fescue often has a creamy colored 
appearance when compared with bluebunch 
wheatgrass (Pseudoregneria spicata).  
  
Prior to 1984 Festuca campestris, F. hallii, F. altaica 
were often treated collectively as F. scabrella.  
Today Festuca campestris is generally regarded as a 
species separate from F. hallii and F. altaica.  
Festuca campestris  has double the chromosome 
number of the other two species.  (Pavlick and 
Looman 1984, Aiken and Darbyshire 1990).   

 

MOUNTAIN ROUGH 

FESCUE 

Festuca campestris Rydb. 

Plant Symbol = FECA4 

Contributed by:  USDA NRCS WA PM Program

 

1. Mountain Rough Fescue,   photo by Francis Njenga 

Alternate Names 
Rough Fescue 
Buffalo Bunchgrass 
Previously known as Festuca scabrella, the currently 
accepted name is Festuca campestris 

Uses 
Grasslands dominated by rough fescue are some of 
the most productive grasslands in Canada ( Aiken 
and Darbyshire 1990, MSU EB69).  
 
Livestock: Rough fescue is highly palatable to 
livestock.   It is excellent forage for cattle and horses 
and good for sheep and wildlife during all growth 
stages. It produces good hay and is valuable for 
winter grazing because it retains much of its protein 
and palatability (Stubbendieck, et.al 2003).   
 

 

 

receiving 15 inches to 24 inches of precipitation 
annually.  It grows on a wide variety of soil parent 
materials.  Soils are typically loamy and are 
moderately deep to deep.  Rough fescue requires 
moist soil, therefore, it is most commonly found on 
north-and east-facing slopes in the foothills region of 
the northern Rocky Mountains (Stout et al. 1981).  
Festuca campestris occurs on more mesic and cooler 
sites than the other two subspecies (Aiken and 
Darbyshire 1990).  It occurs at elevations from  2,800 
to 9,500 ft.. At lower elevations (< 3,600 ft.) in 
Washington state Festuca campestris tends to remain 
a minor component in the community. At elevations 
above 3,600 ft. it may be the dominate grass in the 
plant community. 

Establishment 
Rough fescue typically initiates growth immediately 
following snowmelt, completes growth before the 
onset of summer drought, and is dormant by October. 
Onset of growth in the spring appears to be controlled 
by soil temperature rather than soil water content or 
air temperature (Stout et al. 1981).  In Alberta 
Johnston and MacDonald observed that growth began 
in early May when soil temperatures were 35.6o 
Fahrenheit (2oC) at 8 inches (20 cm).  Flowering 
occurs from mid-May to mid-June, with seed 
dispersal in mid to late July.  Summer growth 
cessation is controlled primarily by available water 
(Stout, McLean, and Quinton 1981).  Fall regrowth 
may occur if significant moisture is present. As with 
most grasses pollen is dispersed by wind.  Seed is 
dispersed by wind and animals. 
 
Planting methods specifically for Festuca campestris 
have yet to be established.  Tried and true methods 
commonly used for other native, perennial, cool 
season bunchgrasses with a seed size of  205,000 
seeds/lb should work for Festuca campestris as well. 
 
 Seed with a drill at a depth of ¼ to ½ inch depending 
on soil texture, coarse soils deeper, fine textured soils 
shallower. The single species seeding rate 
recommended would be about 5 pounds Pure Live 
Seed (PLS) or about 23 PLS per square foot.  If used 
as a component of a mix, adjust to percent of mix 
desired, for broadcast plantings seed at a rate of 40 to 
50 PLS per square foot.  A clean, firm, weed free 
seedbed is required for establishment.  
 
Seed in very early spring on heavy to medium- 
textured soils and in late fall on medium to light- 
textured soils.  Late summer (August to mid- 
September) seeding is not recommended unless 
irrigation is available.  Dormant fall seedings will 
pre-chill seed and may improve germination.   
 

 
 

 

2. Clums are often purplish near the base. 

 

Distribution: Festuca campestris’s  range is from 
southern British Columbia, Alberta, and southwestern 
Saskatchewan south through Washington, Oregon, 
Idaho and Montana.  It is more common north of 48 
degrees latitude in eastern Washington and north of 
46 degrees latitude and west of the continental divide 
in Montana and northern Idaho (Mueggler, and 
Stewart 1980). Festuca campestris overlaps with 
plains rough fescue (Festuca hallii)  in parts of the 
Rocky Mountains (Pavlick and Looman 1984). 
  
For current distribution, please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Habitat:Festuca campestris occurs in grass 
dominated and shrub dominated plant communities.  
It also can occur in ponderosa pine woodlands, open 
ponderosa pine forests, subalpine forests, and in 
grassy areas within forests.  Rough fescue occurs in 
valleys, on benches, in foothills, and in mountains. 
When growing in close proximity with bluebunch 
wheatgrass, mountain rough fescue will usually be on 
the deeper more fertile soil and bluebunch will be on 
the more shallow, less fertile soils.  On the steppes of 
Washington, Festuca campestris is often associated 
with Idaho fescue/sulphur flower (Eriogonum 
heracleoides) and Idaho fescue/common snowberry 
(Symphoricarpos albus) habitat types (Daubenmire, 
R. 1970). 

Adaptation 
Festuca campestris is a cool-season grass adapted to 
mesic cool sites which have a minimum 90 frost –
free days during the growing season (USDA NRCS 
2005).  Coldest month mean temperatures range 
between -3 and -10 degrees C (14 – 26 degrees F.). 
Average warmest month temperatures range between 
14 and 18 degrees C. (57 – 64 degrees F.) (Anderson. 
D. G. 2006).   Festuca campestris occurs in areas 

Management 
Grazing – Rough fescue is tolerant of winter grazing 
(Johnston and MacDonald 1967; Willms, Adams, 
Dormaar 1996).  Approximately 80% utilization can 
occur during dormancy without any appreciable loss 
in summer vigor (Jourdonnais and Dedunah 1986). 
Fall or winter grazing is the most sustainable us of 
rough fescue grasslands (Willms 1991). Plains and 
mountain rough fescue are described as “sensitive” to 
summer grazing (King, Hill, Willms 1998). Studies 
in Canada concluded that heavy grazing (above 2.4 
AUM per hectare) jeopardizes fescue grassland 
ecosystem sustainability by reducing fertility and 
water-holding capacity.  Even light grazing (1.2 
AUM per hectare) during the summer causes rough 
fescue to decline (Dormaar and Willms 1998).  
Rough fescue is considered an “ice-cream” plant to 
livestock and, if improperly managed, can easily be 
grazed out of a community (Tucker, R., personal 
communication).  Soil disturbance by grazing is 
likely to result in a seral community dominated by 
annual forbs (Willms and Quinton 1995).  Grazing 
increased the germination of seed and the vegetative 
expansion of Kentucky bluegrass in rough fescue 
grassland (Willms and Quinton 1995).  Deferred-
rotation and rest-rotation systems of grazing are 
recommended for rough fescue-dominated grasslands 
in Montana. 

Pests and Potential Problems 
Primary pests of Festuca campestris are grasshoppers 
and rodents.  Johnston and MacDonald 1967, noted 
injury to F. campestris reproductive culms by eriophyid 
mites.  Feeding by these mites causes a constricted 
brownish region to develop at the upper node. The 
condition is called silver top because the inflorescence 
has a bleached appearance.   Also F. campestris is likely 
susceptible to pathogenic or decay fungi that affects 
other fescues.  

Environmental Concerns 
Fire –The response of rough fescue to fire is 
complex, and fire cannot be considered purely 
beneficial or detrimental to grasslands dominated by 
this species. The effect of fire on rough fescue varies 
according to stage of growth and season burned.  
Most plants survive fires that occur during dormancy 
or under the high-moisture conditions often 
associated with spring and fall burning.  Timing 
prescribed burns appears to be critical. Rough fescue 
production did not change after a spring or fall burn 
provided the plants were dormant.  Spring burning 
when plants were actively growing caused a decrease 
in coverage for at least 3 years (Bailey and Anderson 
1978).   
 
Rough fescue is vulnerable to altered fire regimes.   
Fire damage can be particularly severe and mortality 
can occur on sites where reduced fire frequencies 
have produced heavy litter buildups within large-

 

 

diameter rough fescue crowns (Antos, McCune, and 
Bara 1983).   Fire suppression has been implicated in 
the spread of woody species in to meadows and 
prairies.  In parts of Montana large areas of 
grasslands have been invaded by Douglas-fir, causing 
reductions in rough fescue dominance (Arno and 
Gruell 1986).     
 
Weeds – Grasslands dominated by rough fescue and 
plains rough fescue can be susceptible to weed 
invasion.  Weeds that have been know n to invade 
rough fescue grasslands include leafy spurge 
(Euphorbia esula), Dalmatian toadflax (Linaria 
dalmatica), St. Johnswort (Hypericum perforatum), 
and spotted knapweed (Centaurea maculosa).  
Smooth brome (Bromus inermis) can be invasive and 
may invade rough fescue communities as well.  

Seeds and Plant Production 
Rough fescue reproduces primarily by seed (USDA 
Plants Database) and rarely produces rhizomes 
(Pavlick and Looman 1984). On average there are 
205,300 rough fescue seeds per pound.  It produces 
seed erratically and several years may pass without 
appreciable seed set.  Cultivated seed production has 
resulted in average production of 100 pounds per acre 
or less (MSU EB 69).  The germination rate of seeds 
of rough fescue is relatively high, ranging from 86 to 
97 percent (Johnston and MacDonald 1967).  For 
plains rough fescue germination is highest at constant 
temperatures of 15 and 20o C, but seeds germinate 
over a wide range of temperatures.  Osmotic potential 
accounts for much of the variation in germination and 
declining osmotic potentials severely restrict 
germination.  Rough fescue (plains) is best planted in 
the spring when temperatures are rising and soil 
moisture is highest (Romo, Grilz, Bubar, and Young 
need year). Bailey and Anderson (1978) observed 
reductions in seed production following spring 
burning.  Fall burning did not affect seed head 
development the following year.  USDA NRCS 2005 
Plants Database) describes seedling vigor as medium.  
Most fescues are obligate outcrossers.  Cold 
stratification is not required for seed germination.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
These plant materials are not available from 
commercial sources.  Seed is currently available from 
field collections only (USDA Plants Database). 

References 
Aiken, S. G. and S. J. Darbyshire. 1990. Fescue 

grasses of Canada. Publication 1844/E. Ottawa, 
ON: Agriculture Canada, Research Branch.  

Antos, Joseph A., Bruce McCune, and Cliff Bara. 
1983. The Effect of Fire on an ungrazed Western 
Montana Grassland. American Midland Naturalist 
110(2): 354-364. 

 

Arno, Stephen F. and George E. Gruell. 1986.  

Douglas-fir Encroachment into Mountain 
Grasslands in Southwestern Montana. Journal of 
Range Management 39(3): 272-276. 

Arno, Stephen F. and George E. Gruell. 1983. Fire 

History at the Forest-Grassland Ecotone in 
Southwestern Montana. Journal of Range 
Management 36(3):332-336. 

Bailey, Arthur W., and Murray L. Anderson. 1978. 
Prescribed Burning of a Festuca-Stipa Grassland. 
Journal of Range Management 31(6) 446-449. 

Daubenmire, R. 1970. Steppe vegetation of 

Washington.  Washington Agriculture Experiment 
Station Technical Bulletin 62. 131 p. 

Dormaar, Johan F. and Walter D. Willms. 1998. 
Effect of forty-four years of grazing on fescue 
grassland soils. Journal of Range Management 
51(1): 122- 126. 

Giesen, Kenneth M., and John W. Connelly. 1993. 
Guidelines for management of Columbian sharp-
tailed grouse habitat.  Wildlife Society Bulletin. 21: 
325-333. 

Anderton, Laurel K., and Mary E. Barkworth.  2009. 

Grasses of the Intermountain Region.  
Intermountain Herbarium, Utah State University, 
Logan, Utah. 

Hodgkinson, Harmon S., and Alfred E. Young. 1973. 

Rough Fescue (Festuca scabrella Torr.) in 
Washington.  Journal of Range Management 
26(1):25-26. 

Johnston A. and M.D. MacDonald. 1967. Floral 

Initiation and Seed Production in Festuca 
Scabrella Torr. Canadian Journal of Plant Science 
Vol. 47: 577-583. 

Jourdonnais, Craig and Don Bedunah. 1986. Burning 
issues of the Sun.  Montana Outdoors 17(6): 15-17. 

Kaldy M.S., A. Johnston and S. Smoliak.  1980.  

Amino Acid Composition of Rough Fescue. 
Journal of Range Mangement 33(4): 295-296. 

King, J.R., M.J. Hill, and W.D. Willms. 1998. 

Temperature effects on regrowth of 3 rough fescue 
species. Journal of Range Management 51(4): 463-
468. 

Montana State University Extension Service. 

Montana Interagency Plant Materials Handbook 
EB 69. June 1990.  

Mueggler, W.F., and W.L. Stewart. 1981. Forage 

Production of Important Rangeland Gabitat Types 
in Western Montana.  Journal of Range 
Management 34(5): 347-353. 

Pavlick, Leon E. and J. Looman. 1984. Taxonomy 

and nomenclature of rough fescues, Festuca altaica, 
F. campestris (F. scabrella var. major) and F. hallii 
in Canada and the U.S. Canadian Journal of 
Botany. 62: 1739-1749.  

Romo, J.T., P.L. Grilz, C.J. Bubar, and J.A. Young. 
1991. Influences of Temperature and Water Stress 
on Germination of Plains Rough Fescue.  Journal 
of Range Mangement 44(1):75-81. 

Stout, Darryl G., Alastair McLean, and Dee A. 

Quinton. 1981.  Growth and Phenological 
Development of Rough Fescue in Interior British 
Columbia. Journal of Range Management 34(6): 
455-459.  

Stubbendieck, James, Stephan L. Hatch, and L.M. 

Landholt.  2003.  North American Wildland Plants, 
A Field Guide. University of Nebraska Press. 

USDA NRCS. 2005. Plants Database. Available at 

www.plants.usda.gov 

Willms, Walter D. 1991. Cutting frequency and 

cutting height effects on rough fescue and Parry oat 
grass yields. Journal of Range Management 44(1):  

Willms, Walter D. and David Chanasyk. 2006. 

Grazing Effects on Snow Accumulation on Rough 
Fescue Grasslands. Rangeland Ecology & 
Management 59(4):400-405. 

Willms, W.D., and D.A. Quinton. 1995. Grazing 

effects on germinable seeds on the fescue prairie.  
Journal of Range Management 48(5):423-430. 

 
Prepared By:  Richard Fleenor, USDA NRCS Plant 
Materials Program, Spokane WA 

Citation 
Fleenor, Richard A. 2011. Plant Guide for mountain 
rough fescue (Festuca campestris). USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Spokane, WA 
99201 

Published:  July, 2011 

For more information about this and other plants, 
please contact your local NRCS field office or 
Conservation District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ 
and visit the PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant Materials Program 
Web site http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or 
availability of other Web sites. 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

