  

 

Natural Resources Conservation Service  

Plant Guide 

 

CURLYCUP GUMWEED 
Grindelia squarrosa (Pursh) Dunal 

Plant Symbol = GRSQ 

 
Common Names:  Tarweed; resinweed; rosinweed 
Scientific Names:  None 

 

 

Description 
General:  Composite family (Asteraceae). Curlycup gumweed is 
a short-lived perennial, or biennial forb averaging 1 to 3 feet 
high. Numerous branching stems bear alternately arranged 
leaves, typically 1 to 4 inches long with entire to serrate or even 
somewhat lobed margins. The flower heads are radiate with 25 
to 40 yellow rays and a yellow center. The involucural bracts are 
squarrose-reflexed, or strongly rolled back, and highly resinous. 
The fruit is a 2.5 to 3 mm long achene bearing 2 to 3 pappus 
awns (Welsh et al., 2003). Flowering occurs in mid- to late-
summer, typically beginning in July and continuing through 
August and into September. Occasional plants will be seen with 
flowers persisting into November. 
 
There are currently three varieties recognized by the PLANTS 
database, including var. quasiperennis, var. serrulata, and var. 
squarrosa. Variety quasiperennis is a true short-lived perennial 
with largely entire leaf margins. The other two varieties, both 
biennials, can be separated by their leaf width to length ratio, 
with var. squarrosa having upper stem leaves 2 to 4 times longer 
than broad, and oblong in outline, and var. serrulata having 
upper stem leaves much narrower, 5 to 8 times longer than 
broad, and narrowly oblong in outline (Welsh et al., 2003). 

Figure 1. Curlycup gumweed growing in a disturbed roadside. 

Distribution: Curlycup gumweed is native throughout North 
America with the exception of the southeastern states. For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 

Habitat:  Curlycup gumweed inhabits a variety of arid plant communities 
including sagebrush steppe, desert grasslands, prairies and mountain 
shrub chaparral (Walsh, 1993). It is very commonly found in disturbed 
roadsides, open fields and in poorly managed pastures and rangelands. 

Adaptation 
Curlycup gumweed is adapted to disturbed sites receiving 10 to 20 inches 
mean annual precipitation. This species is most commonly found in 
rocky, gravelly soils of disturbed roadsides, but can be found in heavier 
silty clay loam soils to sandy loams. Curlycup gumweed is adapted to 
neutral to moderately saline conditions. It is very commonly found 
growing in sites occupied by non-native grasses such as cheatgrass 
(Bromus tectorum) and crested wheatgrass (Agropyron cristatum). 
 

 

Figure 2. Close-up of curlycup gumweed flower head 
showing strongly reflexed involucural bracts. 

 

Uses 
Pollinators: 
This species is highly attractive to native bees. ARS Bee Research Laboratory records indicate visitations by species from 
over 40 genera of native bees (Ikerd, 2016). Its drought tolerance and late-season flowering make it especially valuable for 
CRP and other range plantings in the arid west where late-blooming forbs are limited.  
 
Curlycup gumweed is also readily visited by European honeybees; however, honey produced from this species has an inferior 
flavor and can lower the grade (Dalby, 1999). The pollen is considered more valuable than the nectar, as bees visit the plants 
late in the season to build pollen reserves for winter (Dalby, 1999). 
 
Wildlife: 
Curlycup gumweed has been observed being consumed by sage-grouse. Twenty-eight percent of monitored sage-grouse 
chicks between 5 and 8 weeks of age were reported eating curlycup gumweed in central Montana.  Curlycup gumweed made 
up 3 percent by volume of crop contents.  It was used by 39 percent of 9 to 12 week old chicks and made up 4 percent of crop 
contents.  It was not used by chicks younger than 5 weeks old (Peterson, 1970). 
 
Livestock: 
Curlycup gumweed offers little forage value and is largely unpalatable to cattle, sheep, and horses, though sheep will 
occasionally crop flower heads in the absence of other forage (Johnson and Nichols, 1970). Tannins, volatile oils, resins, 
bitter alkaloids, and glucosides give curlycup gumweed an unpleasant taste (Bare, 1979).  Cattle, sheep, and goats will 
occasionally graze Curlycup gumweed in its rosette stage of growth.  
   

Ethnobotany 
The resin of curlycup gumweed contains many medicinally beneficial compounds. Native Americans used this species for a 
variety of ailments. A decoction of root was used for liver trouble. (McClintock, 1909), and a paste made from flowering tops 
was applied to skin diseases, scabs and sores (Hart, 1992). 

Status 
Threatened or Endangered:  No. 
Wetland Indicator: Curlycup gumweed is considered to be a Facultative Upland (FACU) species (usually occurs in non-
wetlands (estimated probability 67%-99%), but occasionally found in wetlands (estimated probability 1%-33%) or Obligate 
Upland (UPL) species (occurs in wetlands in another region, but occur almost always (estimated probability >99%) under 
natural conditions in non-wetlands in the region specified).  
Weedy or Invasive:  
Although this species is native to North America, it can have weedy or invasive characteristics under improper management 
(Stubbendieck et al, 1994; Whitson et al., 1996). It has become a problematic weed in Eastern Europe (Sirbu and Oprea, 
2008). Please consult with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service office, state natural resource, or 
state agriculture department regarding its status and use. 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site (http://plants.usda.gov/) and your state’s Department of Natural Resources for this 
plant’s current status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Planting Guidelines 
Tests conducted at Aberdeen Plant Materials Center indicate there are approximately 400,000 seeds/lb and 39 lbs/bushel. 
Based on a seeding rate of 50 pure live seeds (PLS) per foot, the full stand seeding rate is 5 lbs/ac. Seeding rate should be 
adjusted to match the desired percentage within a seed mixture. 
 
McDonough (1975) showed that curlycup gumweed exhibited seed germination polymorphism. Disc achenes (those from the 
center of the flower) germinated more rapidly and attained higher final germination percentages than did ray achenes (those 
from the outer, petal-like flowers). It is believed that this allows germination and emergence to occur during different 
seasons, and subsequently affects the time required for completion of the growth cycle. 

Management 
Due to its low moisture requirements and limited palatability, curlycup gumweed increases under drought conditions in 
irrigated pasture as well as under poor grazing management practices, and is often associated with pastures and range that 
have been over grazed. Curlycup gumweed should be used as a minor component of pollinator and restoration seed mixtures.  

 

Management strategies should be based on the key species in the established plant community.  Grazing should be deferred 
on seeded lands for at least two growing seasons to allow for full stand establishment (Ogle et al., 2011). 

Pests and Potential Problems 
Curlycup gumweed has been shown to have the capacity to serve as a host plant of the Colorado red node virus of bean 
(Thomas, 1949). It may also have the ability to accumulate selenium from the soil and become toxic to livestock (SDSU, 
2016) 

Environmental Concerns 
Curlycup gumweed is native to western North America. It will spread under favorable conditions but does not pose any 
environmental concern to native plant communities under proper management. Due to its ability to readily occupy disturbed 
sites, it has been associated with other rangeland weeds (Whitson et al., 1996). 
 
Control 
Early season treatments (June) with broadleaf selective herbicides such as metsulfuron, 2,4-D, or dicamba produced better 
than 95% control of curlycup gumweed, while later treatments (August) yielded slightly lower results (Ferrell and Whitson, 
1987). 
 
Contact your local agricultural extension specialist or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your area and how 
to use it safely.  Always read label and safety instructions for each control method.  Trade names and control measures appear 
in this document only to provide specific information.  USDA NRCS does not guarantee or warranty the products and control 
methods named, and other products may be equally effective. 

Seeds and Plant Production 
Small scale production fields and wildland collections can be made by beating the seeds off the plant into a bin or bag, or by 
clipping the flower heads. Seed is cleaned by running the collected material through a hammer mill followed by sieving and 
air-screening. Seed often contains small grubs. Placing the seed in a freezer for 24 hours may help eliminate seed eating 
insects. 
 
Nuzzo (1978) used a 10 week moist stratification for propagating curlycup gumweed. She reported first germination occurred 
after 3 days and peak germination occurred after 14 days. Plants were ready to transplant into the field after 10 weeks. 
 
Two similar species, Grindelia camporum and G. stricta, are grown for seed production in California. Both have very sticky 
vegetation like curlycup gumweed. Fields are direct combined; however the gum must be scraped off of the combine and 
machine parts every so often to keep it working effectively. The seeds separate from the seed head quite readily. Deer are 
very fond of the young vegetation and may pose a problem in production settings (Emily Allen, Hedgerow Farms Personal 
communication 2016).  

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area of origin)  
Limited quantities of wildland collected seed may be available from commercial sources. There are currently no commercial 
releases of curlycup gumweed; however multiple accessions are currently under investigation at Aberdeen Plant Materials 
Center for potential release. Seed sources should be selected based on the local climate, resistance to local pests, and intended 
use. Consult with your local land grant university, local extension or local USDA NRCS office for recommendations for use 
in your area. 
 
Literature Cited 
Allen, E. 2016. Hedgerow Farms, Winter CA. Personal Communication. 
Bare, J.E. 1979. Wildflowers and weeds of Kansas. Lawrence, KS: The Regents Press of Kansas. 509p. 
Dalby, R. 1999. Minor bee plants in a major key: gum weed, common mallow, and alfileria. American Bee Journal. 139(11): 

855-856. 

Communication. 

Ferrell, M.A.; Whitson, T.D. 1987. Evaluation of curlycup gumweed control with spring vs. fall herbicide applications. 

Proceedings of the western society of weed science. 40: 72-73.                      

Hart, Jeff, 1992, Montana Native Plants and Early Peoples, Helena. Montana Historical Society Press, page 32  
Ikerd, H. 2016. USDA-ARS Bee Research Laboratory, Logan, Utah. Insect Visitation Database Manager. Personal 

Johnson, James R.; Nichols, James T. 1970. Plants of South Dakota grasslands: A photographic study. Bull. 566. Brookings, 

SD: South Dakota State University, Agricultural Experiment Station. 163 p.  

McClintock, Walter, 1909, Medizinal- Und Nutzpflanzen Der Schwarzfuss Indianer, Zeitschriff fur Ethnologie 41:273-9. 
McDonough, W.T. 1975. Germination polymorphism in Grindelia squarrosa. Northwest Science. 49(4): 190-200. 

 

Peterson, J.G. 1970. The food habits and summer distribution of juvenile sage grouse in central Montana. Journal of Wildlife 

Management. 34(1): 147-155. 

Nuzzo, V. 1978. Propagation and planting of prairie forbs and grasses in southern Wisconsin. Dane County Highway 

Department. Madison, WI. In: Glenn-Lewin, D.C. and R.Q. Landers. Fifth Midwest Prairie Conference Proceedings: 
Iowa State University. Ames, IA. August 22-24, 1976. 

Nyamusamba, R. 2016. Controlling curlycup gumweed (Grindelia squarrosa). South Dakota State University Extension. 

2016. http://igrow.org/livestock/beef/controlling-curlycup-gumweed-grindelia-squarrosa/ 

Ogle, D., St. John, L. Stannard, M. and L. Holzworth. 2011. Technical Note 24: Conservation plant species for the 

Intermountain West. USDA-NRCS, Boise, ID-Salt Lake City, UT-Spokane, WA. ID-TN 24. 57p. 

Peterson, J.G. 1970. The food habits and summer distribution of juvenile sage grouse in central Montana. Journal of Wildlife 

Management. 34(1): 147-155. 

Sîrbu, C.; Oprea, A. 2008. Two alien species in the spreading process in Romania: Reynoutria × bohemica Chrtek & 

Chrtková and Grindelia squarrosa (Pursh) Dunal. Cercetari agronomice în moldova. 41 (2): 41-50. 

Stubbendieck, J., G.Y. Friisoe, and M.R. Bolick. 1994. Weeds of Nebraska and the Great Plains. Nebraska Department of 

Agriculture, Bureau of Plant Industry. Lincoln, Nebraska. 

Thomas, W.D. 1949. Studies on the host range of the Colorado red-node virus. Journal of the Colorado-Wyoming Academy 

of Science. 4 (1): 40 p. 

University, Provo, UT. 

Walsh, R.A. 1993. Grindelia squarrosa. In: Fire Effects Information System, [Online]. USDA, Forest Service, Rocky 

Mountain Research Station, Fire Sciences Laboratory. 

Welsh, S.L., Atwood, N.D., Goodrich, S., and L.C. Higgins. 2003. A Utah Flora. Third Edition, revised. Brigham Young 

Whitson, T.D. (ed.), Burrill, L.C., Dewey, S.A., Cudney, D.W., Nelson, B.E., Lee, R.D. and R. Parker. 1996. Weeds of the 
West. Western Society of Weed Science in cooperation with Cooperative Extension Services, University of Wyoming. 
Laramie, Wyoming. 

 
Citation 
Tilley, D. and T. Pickett. 2016. Plant Guide for curlycup gumweed (Grindelia squarrosa). USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Aberdeen Plant Materials Center. Aberdeen, ID. 83210. 

Published: December 2016  
 
Edited:  

For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation District at 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the  
Plant Materials Program Web site: 
http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability of other Web sites. 
 
 
 

 

 

 

The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination against its customers, employees, and applicants for 
employment on the bases of race, color, national origin, age, disability, sex, gender identity, religion, reprisal, and where applicable, 
political beliefs, marital status, familial or parental status, sexual orientation, or all or part of an individual's income is derived from 
any public assistance program, or protected genetic information in employment or in any program or activity conducted or 
funded by the Department. (Not all prohibited bases will apply to all programs and/or employment activities.)  
 
If you wish to file an employment complaint, you must contact your agency's EEO Counselor (PDF) within 45 days of the date 
of the alleged discriminatory act, event, or in the case of a personnel action. Additional information can be found online at 
http://www.ascr.usda.gov/complaint_filing_file.html.  
 
If you wish to file a Civil Rights program complaint of discrimination, complete the USDA Program Discrimination Complaint 
Form (PDF), found online at http://www.ascr.usda.gov/complaint_filing_cust.html, or at any USDA office, or call (866) 632-
9992 to request the form. You may also write a letter containing all of the information requested in the form. Send your 
completed complaint form or letter to us by mail at U.S. Department of Agriculture, Director, Office of Adjudication, 1400 
Independence Avenue, S.W., Washington, D.C. 20250-9410, by fax (202) 690-7442 or email at program.intake@usda.gov.  
Individuals who are deaf, hard of hearing or have speech disabilities and you wish to file either an EEO or program complaint 
please contact USDA through the Federal Relay Service at (800) 877-8339 or (800) 845-6136 (in Spanish).  
 
Persons with disabilities who wish to file a program complaint, please see information above on how to contact us by mail directly 
or by email. If you require alternative means of communication for program information (e.g., Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) 
please contact USDA's TARGET Center at (202) 720-2600 (voice and TDD).  
 
For any other information dealing with Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) issues, persons should either contact 
the USDA SNAP Hotline Number at (800) 221-5689, which is also in Spanish or call the State Information/Hotline Numbers.  
For any other information not pertaining to civil rights, please refer to the listing of the USDA Agencies and Offices for specific 
agency information. 
 

 

Helping People Help the Land 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

