 

 

Plant Guide

Grindelia hirsutula Hook. & Arn. var. davyi (Jepson) 
M.A. Lane 
Grindelia paludosa Greene 
Grindelia procera Greene 
Grindelia robusta Nutt.  
 
Please Note: The Grindelia genus represents a highly 
variable array of ecological forms occurring over a large 
area of North America in diverse habitats.  Some sources 
have grouped G. camporum into a much larger complex 
under the species name Grindelia hirsutula, combining 25 
previously separate taxa (Strother, 2006).  This genus is 
currently the subject of extensive genetic research to 
determine which morphologies represent true 
phylogenetic differences and how much variability is 
phenotypic or the result of hybridization (Bartoli, 2012; 
Moore, 2012; USDA ARS, 2012).  Therefore, this plant 
guide applies best only to G. camporum as it was initially 
described and not under the umbrella grouping of G. 
hirsutula. 
 
Uses 
Horticulture: Great Valley gumweed is an attractive 
ornamental for use in wildflower meadows and butterfly 
gardens.  It flowers from May to late October or early 
November, providing color through the summer and 
autumn months (Munz, 1968; Moore, 2012).  
 
Wetland Restoration: This species thrives in disturbed 
areas, along stream banks, and in alluvial soils 
(Timmerman, 1987), which makes Great Valley gumweed 
a good candidate for riparian and wetland restoration 
projects.  Wetland plants have enormous ecosystem 
importance and help to balance water salinity, prevent soil 
erosion, and may reduce runoff pollution into waterways. 
 
Pollinators and Beneficial Insects: High drought and salt 
tolerance allows this plant to persist throughout the late 
summer months when other plants wither, (Hoffman 
1986; Timmerman, 1987) making it an important late-
season source of pollen and nectar for native bees, honey 
bees, syrphid flies, and butterflies.  For this reason, it is 
often planted in pollinator meadows and hedgerows.  
Great Valley gumweed is an obligate out-crosser, 
meaning it cannot self-fertilize and relies entirely upon 
the pollination services of insects for reproductive success 
(Dunford, 1964; Schuck, 1988).  
 
Medicinal: Historically, Great Valley gumweed has been 
used in herbal remedies to treat respiratory maladies, 
dermatological conditions, blood disorders, and minor 
injuries (See Ethnobotany below).  Grindelia is presently 
available from herbal supplement stores and is touted for 

GREAT VALLEY 

GUMWEED 

 
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Lockeford Plant Materials 
Center, California 

Grindelia camporum Greene 

Plant Symbol = GRCA 

Figure 1: Great Valley gumweed in bloom, with immature flower buds 
and open flowers. Photo M. Bliss, NRCS Lockeford Plant Materials 
Center, 2012.  

 

Alternate Names 
Common Alternate Names:  
common gumplant 
Great Valley gumplant  
resinweed  
boton de oro (golden button) 
 
Scientific Alternate Names:   
Grindelia bracteosa J.T. Howell 
Grindelia camporum Greene var. camporum 
Grindelia camporum Greene var. parviflora 

 

its anti-inflammatory, expectorant, and pain relieving 
properties.  
 
Warning: Great Valley gumweed may contain high 
levels of selenium, which is toxic when ingested in large 
amounts.    
 
Resin Production: Great Valley gumweed is so-named for 
the tacky residue produced in multicellular glands and 
ducts coating the plants’ flower heads and leaves.  For 
many years, the value of gumweed “gum” has been 
known to chemists who have sought turn the plant into a 
valuable cash crop in arid regions.  The resins produced 
by Grindelia are not true polysaccharide gums, but 
diterpene acids that serve an important use in the naval 
stores industry (Hoffman, 1986; Timmerman, 1987). 
These specialty chemicals are used in a variety of 
industrial applications such as soil amendments, rubber 
production, animal feed supplements, paper sizing, 
fermentation products, synthetic fuels, paints, varnishes, 
and lacquers (Hoffman, 1986).  Grindelia camporum is an 
excellent candidate for producing these chemicals; 
labdene-type acids account for approximately 10% of the 
plant’s dry weight.  This substance is hydrophobic, non-
volatile, and virtually identical to rosins found in pine and 
other woods traditionally used in naval stores production, 
but is less labor-intensive to extract, and ideal for growing 
in the American southwest, where water is a limiting 
factor (Hoffman, 1986).  Gumweed trials for resin 
production have occurred in Tucson, Arizona and Lahore, 
Pakistan (Zafar, 1994).  
 
Status 
Great Valley gumweed is classified as a facultative 
upland plant; it usually occurs in non-wetland areas, but is 
occasionally found in wetlands.  Please consult the 
PLANTS Web site and your State Department of Natural 
Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., threatened 
or endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland 
indicator values). 

Weediness 
This plant may become weedy in orchards if not properly 
managed.  Please consult with your local NRCS Field 
Office, Cooperative Extension Service office, state natural 
resource, or state agriculture department regarding its 
status and use.  Weed information is also available from 
the PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/.  Please 
consult the Related Web Sites on the Plant Profile for this 
species for further information. 

Description  
General: Great Valley gumweed, a member of the 
sunflower family (Asteraceae), is a perennial, semi-
woody subshrub native to central California.  There are 
approximately 60 species within the genus Grindelia 
distributed between North and South America.  
Intermediate forms are common where species ranges 
overlap (Dunford, 1964; Moore; 2012).  

 

 

Great Valley gumweed grows 2–8 feet tall but dies back 
in the winter to a basal rosette of leaves before bolting 
again from the perennial rootstock (Hoffman, 1986).  The 
gangly, branched stems appear white-varnished and are 
generally leafy and upright with tips ascending.  Leaves 
are lance-shaped (lanceolate) to ovate, alternate, and 
stalkless, often with clasping bases.  They have entire or 
serrate margins, grow up to 2½ inches long and ½ inch 
wide, are slightly wider near the tip, and are dotted with 
stalked glands that produce a sticky resin (Moore, 2012).   
 
Plants flower from May to November.  Immature flower 
heads are spheroid and ooze sticky, white latex that gives 
them a milky appearance.  When open, the daisy-like 
flower heads are 1 to 2 inches across and are composed of 
25–39 yellow petal-like ray flowers 1/3 to 4/5 inch long 
surrounding the yellow disk flowers in the center.  Below 
the flower heads is the involcre, a whorled cup of sticky-
glandular, green bracts (phyllaries) with long, thin tips 
that are spreading or sometimes curved back from the 
flower head.  Fruits are small, wind-borne, dandelion-like 
achenes with featherlike tufts of two to several firm, but 
deciduous, awns. The seeds themselves are somewhat 
flattened, 3/8 inch long, and 1/16 inch wide (Moore, 2012)..  
 
The specific taxonomy of this plant is very complex, 
making identification a difficult task best suited for 
trained botanists.   

Distribution: Great Valley gumweed is native to central 
California.  It is found primarily in the Sacramento and 
San Joaquin Valleys.  However, the plant may also be 
found to the east, across the North Coast Ranges and 
around the San Francisco Bay, north to the Cascade 
Range foothills, west along the Sierra Nevadas, and south 
along the outer Southern Coast Ranges into Baja 
California (Moore, 2012).  There are historical records of 
introductions to Pennsylvania (Steyermark, 1934) and 
Massachusetts (Robinson, 1924).  For updated 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site.  

Habitat: This plant may be found in sandy or saline 
bottomlands, dry banks, rocky fields, plains, and 
roadsides (Munz, 1968; Moore, 2012).  

Ethnobotany 
Native Americans regarded Great Valley gumweed as a 
useful medicinal plant for a variety of treatments, 
including respiratory and dermatological afflictions.  
 
The Costanoan Indians boiled leaves and flower heads of 
gumweed for healing dermatitis caused by poison oak, 
and for wounds, burns, boils, and sores (Bocek, 1984; 
Foster, 2002).  The Kawaiisu people used a similar 
decoction as a general analgesic and orthopedic aid, 
applying the plant material to their sore muscles 
(Zigmond, 198; Foster 2002), and Miwok Indians used 
fresh, resinous buds as a treatment for blood disorders 

(Merriam, 1966).  These Native American remedies were 
so effective that many were adopted by early physicians 
of Western medicine in California (Foster, 2002). 

Adaptation 
Within its historical range, Great Valley gumweed occurs 
across a wide variety of habitats, often eking out a niche 
where other plants are not adapted to survive.  It can grow 
in highly alkaline soils, and is one of few actively 
growing plants during the dry central Californian 
summers (Hoffman, 1986; Timmerman, 1987). Great 
Valley gumweed is hardy to zone 9 and grows below 
4600 feet (Moore, 2012).  

Establishment 
Propagation is easiest from seed, and germination rates 
are generally high.  Achenes placed under a thin layer of 
soil on wet filter paper at ambient temperature and diffuse 
light germinate at around 70%, but an 8-day cool 
pretreatment at 46°F can raise these rates slightly 
(McLaughlin, 1987; Zafar, 1994).  Germination usually 
occurs at 2 to 3 weeks at 50–60°F.  Seed can be 
propagated in containers and transplanted, or sown 
directly on-site in the fall or spring, though October 
plantings tend to produce higher yields with lower 
irrigation requirements (McLaughlin, 1987). There are 
approximately 229,600 seeds per pound.  The 
recommended single-species seeding rate is about 1 
pound per acre at a depth of ¼ to ½ inch, or about 0.5 
lb/acre in a mix.  Plants may also be propagated 
vegetatively by root or stem cuttings, but these methods 
are very labor-intensive and result in fairly low 
establishment rates.  Plants do best in full sun on well 
drained soil.  In winter, the plant dies back, but rebolts 
from perennial rootstock in the spring (Hoffman, 1986). 
Seed collection is easiest by hand. Inflorescences are 
thoroughly dried and crushed. Achene awns separate 
easily and may be screened and sorted by weight. 

Management 
Once established, plants require little management. The 
will tolerate high mowing during spring and summer and 
a low mow in fall that breaks up dead vegetation. 

Pests and Potential Problems 
Although Great Valley gumweed attracts many 
pollinators, no insects are known to cause damage to the 
plant.  The highly resinous nature of gumweed defends 
against herbivory from insects (Severns, 2009) and 
possibly larger herbivores such as deer. There are no 
known diseases of this plant.  

Environmental Concerns 
There are no known environmental concerns associated 
with Great Valley gumweed.  

Control 
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 

 

 

area and how to use it safely.  Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method.   

Seeds and Plant Production 
Stands of Great Valley gumweed have been raised in 
many arid regions of the world, but the planting for each 
stand depends on climate.  For commercial plantings, 
fluid-drilling of pretreated seeds has been used (Zafar, 
1994) with an optimum density of 32,400 plants per acre 
(McLaughlin, 1987).  Pretreated seeds were soaked under 
continuous light for optimum germination at 50-68°F, but 
this pretreatment could be substituted for a two-stage cold 
stratification at 32°F followed by 59°F in the dark 
(McLaughlin, 1987; Zafar, 1994).  Since the plant is salt 
and drought tolerant, very little irrigation or soil 
treatments are needed. In successful commercial plantings 
the soil was classified as poor to low-fertile (Zafar, 1994).  
Plants may be harvested twice in a growing season, first 
in June and then in October by hand-cutting the stems 2 – 
4 inches above ground.  Harvested plants may then be air 
dried in an oven at 203°F, and resin extracted by milling 
each part of the plant and using dichloromethane in a 
Soxhelt extractor (Zafar, 1994).  

 

 
Figure 2: Mature Great Valley gumweed flower heads in seed.  Photo 
M. Bliss, NRCS Lockeford Plant Materials Center, 2012 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
There are no developed cultivars of Great Valley 
gumweed, but seed is generally available from 
commercial sources both individually and in pollinator 
mixes.  Container plants are also sometimes available 

from native plant nurseries in the Central Valley and 
surrounding foothills.  

 

References 
Bartoli, A., and R.D. Tortosa. 2012. Revision of the North 
American species of Grindelia (Asteraceae). Annals of 
the Missouri Botanical Garden. 98(4):447-513. 

Bocek, B.R. 1984. Ethnobotany of Costanoan Indians, 

California, based on collections by John P. Harrington. 
Economic Botany 38(2):240-255 (p. 26). 

Dunford, M.P. 1964. A cytogenetic analysis of certain 
polyploids in Grindelia (Compositae). Amer. J. Bot. 
51(1): 49-56. 

Foster, S, and C. Hobbs. 2002. A field guide to western 

medicinal plants and herbs. Houghton Mifflin 
Company, New York. (p.132). 

Hoffmann, J. J., and S. P. McLaughlin. 1986. Grindelia 
camporum: potential cash crop for the arid southwest. 
Economic Botany 40: 162-169. 

McLaughlin, S. P., and J. D. Linker. 1987. Agronomic 

studies on gumweed: seed germination, planting 
density, planting dates, and biomass and resin 
production. Field Crops Research 15: 357-367. 

Merriam, C.H. 1966. Ethnographic notes on California 
Indian tribes. University of California Archaeological 
Research Facility, Berkeley (p. 338). 

Moore, A. 2012. Treatment of Grindelia. 2012. The 

Jepson Manual: Vascular Plants of California. 2nd ed. 
University of California Press, Berkeley.  

Munz, P.A. and D.D. Keck. 1968. A California flora with 

supplement. Univ. of California Press, Berkeley. 

Robinson, B.L., editor. 1924. Reports on the flora of the 

Boston district XLVI. Rhodera 26:108. 

Schuck, S. M., and S. P. McLaughlin. 1988. Flowering 

phenology and outcrossing in tetraploid Grindelia 
camporum Greene. Desert Plants 9: 7-16. 

Severns, P.M and E. Karacetin. 2009. Sex bias adult 

feeding for gumweed (Asteraceae) flower nectar and 
extrafloral resin by a wetland population of Lycaena 
xanthoides (Boisduval) (Lycaenidae). Journal of the 
Lepidopterists’ Society 63(2): 83-86. 

Steyermark, J. A. 1934. Studies in Grindelia II: a 

monograph of the North American species of the genus 
Grindelia. Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden 21: 
433-608. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Strother, J.L. and M.A. Wetter. 2006. Treatment of 
Grindelia. Flora of North America 20: 424-425. 

Timmermann, B. N., S. P. McLaughlin, and J. J. 

Hoffmann. 1987. Quantitative variation of grindelane 
diterpene acids in 20 species of North American 
Grindelia. Biochemical Systematics and Ecology 
15:401-410. 

USDA, ARS, National Genetic Resources Program. 

Germplasm Resources Information Network - (GRIN) 
[Online Database: http://www.ars-grin.gov/cgi-
bin/npgs/html/paper.pl?language=en&chapter=scient 
27 March 2012)]. Natl. Germplasm Resources 
Laboratory, Beltsville, Maryland. 

Zafar, S. I., W. H. Shah, and Z. U. Rehman. 1994. Studies 

on achene germination, transplantability, saltinity 
tolerance, and cultivation of gumweed (Grindelia 
camporum) in hot and semi-arid conditions. Field Crops 
Research 37:77-84. 

Zigmond, Maurice L. 1981. Kawaiisu ethnobotany. Salt 

Lake City. University of Utah Press (p. 33) 

 
Prepared By:  Marc Bliss, USDA-NRCS Lockeford 
Plant Materials Center, California 

Citation 
Bliss, M. 2012. Plant guide for Great Valley gumweed 
(Grindelia camporum). USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Plant Materials Center, Lockeford, 
CA. 

Published August, 2013 
Edited: 02oct2012 pbnj, 10Dec2012 msk, 7Jun2013 jb 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

