 
 

 

Plant Guide

 
Ethnobotanical: The roots and leaves of sticky purple 
geranium were used by the Blackfeet, Okanagan, Colville, 
Sanpoil, Nlaka’pmx and other Native American tribes. 
Medicinal uses included a cold remedy, a dermatological 
aid, and treatment for sore eyes. It was also used to make 
a love potion and as a food preservative (Native American 
Ethnobotany Database 2010; Parish et al 1996). Herbalists 
apply it to cuts to help blood clotting or use it internally to 
stop bleeding (Parish et al 1996).  
 
Wildlife: Seeds of this plant are eaten by birds and small 
mammals (Mee et al 2003) and leaves are foraged by 
small mammals, deer, elk and bears (Robson and Kingery 
2006).  
 
Pollinator habitat: Sticky purple geranium is pollinated 
by flies, butterflies and native bees (Mee et al 2003). 
Finer (2003) found within the Palouse ecoregion of 
eastern Washington, seed set of sticky purple geranium 
declined with reduced habitat size, as did pollinator 
visitation, richness and diversity.  
 
Status  
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State Department 
of Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).  
 
Description  
General: Rose Family (Rosaceae). Sticky purple 
geranium is a native perennial forb that grows to 40 to 90 
cm tall. It has sticky glandular hairs that densely cover the 
stems and leaves. Leaves are basal, on long stalks and 
have blades 5 to 12 cm wide. The leaves are deeply 
palmately lobed into 5 to 7 sharply toothed divisions. 
Flowers are 2.5 cm wide, occur in open clusters near the 
top, and have 5 petals. Petals are pinkish-lavender to deep 
purple-magenta with purple veins and soft hairs on the 
lower half. Seed capsules are elongated, glandular and 
hairy, with a long beak shaped like a stork’s or crane’s 
bill. The genus Geranium is derived from the Greek word 
geranos, which means crane (Parish et al 1996). 
 
Sticky purple geranium has an interesting feature of being 
protocarnivorous; it is able to dissolve protein, such as 
insects, that become trapped on its leaf surface and absorb 
the nitrogen derived from the protein (Spomer 1999). 
Many plants with sticky leaf surfaces have evolved to 
have this characteristic in order to thrive in nutrient-poor 
environments (Larcher 2003). 
 

STICKY PURPLE 

GERANIUM 

Geranium viscosissimum AFisch 

& C.A. Mey ex. C.A. Mey 

Plant Symbol = GEVI2 

Contributed by NRCS Plant Materials Center, Pullman, 
Washington 

 

 Pamela Scheinost, Pullman Plant Materials Center 
 
 Alternate Names  
Sticky geranium, pink geranium, cranesbillThis species 
should not be confused with Geranium richardsonii 
Fisch. & Trautv., which is also sometimes referred to as 
sticky geranium. G. richardsonii has pale pink to white 
flowers, and has leaves with hairs only along the veins on 
the lower sides, whereas leaves of G. viscosissium, and 
are sticky-hairy all over. Other common names for G. 
richardsonii include Richardson’s geranium and white 
geranium. There are reports of possible hybridization 
between the two species (Parish et al 1996).  

Uses  
Ornamental: Sticky purple geranium is an excellent 
choice for sustainable urban landscapes because it needs 
little supplemental irrigation, it blooms continuously May 
through August, and the foliage turns red in the fall (Mee 
et al 2003). The plant grows well in areas receiving full 
sun or partial shade. It can spread if it receives too much 
shade or water.  

 

 

 

soak for 24 hours. Robson and Kingery (2006) 
recommend scarifying seed with fine-grit sand paper prior 
to soaking in cold water for 24 hours.  
 
Treated seed should be drilled in the fall at a depth of ¼ 
inch into a firm, weed free seed bed at a rate of 1.6 
kilograms Pure Live Seed (PLS) per hectare (1.4 pounds 
per acre) for pure stands (Lambert 2005). When seeded in 
a mix, the seed rate should be adjusted according to the 
proportion of the mix. Germination may be sporadic and 
establishment may take up to 3 years (Robson and 
Kingery 2006).  
 
More rapid establishment can be achieved by 
transplanting seedlings. With this method, treated seed 
should be sown into containers and then cold-moist 
stratified for at least 30 days prior to being transferred to a 
greenhouse. Seedlings can be transplanted to the desired 
sites in the spring or fall.  
 
Management  
Sticky purple geranium requires low to moderate fertility. 
Many new plants can result from seed shatter in 
subsequent years. To prevent unwanted plants, remove 
the seedpods before they are fully ripe. Plants become 
woody with age and should be separated.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems  
Some native and cultivated stands of sticky purple 
geranium are susceptible to powdery mildew, which can 
be controlled with fungicidal sprays (Jensen 2010).  
 
Environmental Concerns  
None  
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Seed pods mature indeterminately and shatter easily 
(Skinner 2008). The pods should be collected in mid-
August before the capsules split, placed into paper bags, 
transferred to mesh bags and allowed to dry (Robson and 
Kingery 2006; Luna and Lapp 2008). Seeds are grey to 
brown when mature and can be cleaned with a hammer 
mill and office clipper (Luna and Lapp 2008). There are 
about 121,000 seeds per kilogram (55,000 seeds per 
pound) (Skinner 2008). Seed is commercially available 
through several vendors.  
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
None  
 
References  
Finer, M. 2003. Effects of geitonogamy, habitat 
fragmentation, and population size on plant 
 
 
reproductive success: ecological and evolutionary 
 
studies. Ph.D. diss. Washington State Univ., Pullman, 
  WA.  
Jensen, J. 2010. Personal communication. Thorn Creek 
 

Native Seeds, Genesee, ID.  

 

Pamela Scheinost, Pullman Plant Materials Center  
 
Sticky purple geranium has an interesting feature of being 
protocarnivorous; it is able to dissolve protein, such as 
insects, that become trapped on its leaf surface and absorb 
the nitrogen derived from the protein (Spomer 1999). 
Many plants with sticky leaf surfaces have evolved to 
have this characteristic in order to thrive in nutrient-poor 
environments (Larcher 2003).  
 
Distribution: This plant is widely distributed and locally 
abundant throughout its range (Parrish et al 1996). It is 
found from southern British Columbia south through 
eastern Washington and Oregon to northern California, 
and east to northwestern New Mexico, western Colorado 
and Saskatchewan. There are two ecotypes: Geranium 
viscosissimum var. incisum, which is found within the 
entire range of the species, and Geranium viscosissimum 
var. viscosissimum, which does not extend into Colorado, 
Utah or New Mexico. For current distribution, consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  
 
Habitat: Sticky purple geranium is found in foothills, 
canyons, open woodlands to montane environments. It is 
often associated with subalpine, coniferous forest, aspen 
forest, meadow, mountain brush and shrub steppe plant 
communities (Mee et al 2003).  
 
Adaptation  
Sticky purple geranium grows in areas receiving 25 to 50 
or more centimeters (10 to 20 or more inches) of annual 
precipitation at elevations ranging from 300 to 3,200 
meters (1,000 to 10,500 feet). It is hardy to Zone 2 (Mee 
et al 2003). It is commonly found on well-drained soil, 
however it can grow on a variety of soil types (Robson 
and Kingery 2006).  
 
Establishment  
Germination of sticky purple geranium is improved with a 
combination of seed treatments. Luna and Lapp (2008) 
achieved 50 – 84% germination by scarifying seed with a 
hot water bath for 5 – 10 seconds and immediately 
transferring to a cold water bath, where they left the seeds 

Springer-Verlag, Berlin and Heidelberg.  

ed. 

Southern Interior British Columbia and the Inland 
Northwest. Lone Pine Publishing, Vancouver, BC.  

Johnson. 2003. Waterwise: Native Plants for 
Intermountain Landscapes. Utah State University 
Press, Logan, UT.  

Lambert, S. 2005. Guidebook to the Seeds of Native and 
Non-Native Grasses, Forbs and Shrubs of the Great 
 
 
Basin. Idaho BLM Technical Bulletin 2005-04. 
United States Department of the Interior, Bureau of 
 
 
Land Management, Boise, ID.  
Larcher, W. 2003. Physiological Plant Ecology, 4th 
 
Luna, T. and J. Lapp. 2008. Propagation protocol for 
production of container Geranium viscosissimum 
 
 
Fisch. & Mey ex. Mey; United States Department of 
 
the Interior, National Park Service, Glacier National 
Park, West Glacier, Montana. In: Native Plant 
 
Network. [Online] Available at 
 
http://www.nativeplantnetwork.org (accessed 10 June 
 
 
2010). University of Idaho, College of Natural 
 
Resources, Forest Research Nursery, Moscow, ID.  
Mee, W., J. Barnes, R. Kjelgren, R. Sutton, T. Cerny, C. 
 
 
 
Native American Ethnobotany Database. 2010. [Online] 
Available at http://herb.umd.umich.edu/ (Accessed 6 
 
 
June 2010). University of Michigan, Dearborn, MI.  
Parish, R., R. Coupe, D. Lloyd (eds). 1996. Plants of 
 
 
Robson, S. and J. Kingery. 2006. Native Plants for 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Skinner, D. 2008. Unpublished data. USDA NRCS Plant 
  Materials Center, Pullman, WA.  
Spomer, G. 1999. Evidence of protocarnivorous 
capabilities in Geranium viscosissimum and 
 
Potentilla arguta and other sticky plants. Int. J. Plant 
 
 
Sci. 160:98-101.  
 
Prepared By  
Pamela L. Scheinost, USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Pullman, Washington  
Mark E. Stannard, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Pullman, Washington  
 

Roadside Restoration and Revegetation Programs. 
[Online] Available at 
http://www.itd.idaho.gov/manuals/Online_ManuMan
/Current_Manuals/Roadside_Revegetation/RoRoadsi
_Revegetation.pdf (Accessed 6 June 2010) 
University of Idaho, Moscow, ID.  

Citation  
Scheinost, P.L. and M.E. Stannard. 2010. Plant guide for 
sticky purple geranium (Geranium viscosissimum). 
USDA-Natural Resources Conservation Service, Plant 
Materials Center. Pullman, WA.  
 
Published July, 2010 
 
Edited: 11June2010mes; 11June2010jab; 29June2010pls 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

