 
 

 

Plant Guide

threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General: 
Bellflower family (Campanulaceae). Water howellia is a 
winter-annual emergent aquatic herb. The stems are 
submerged or floating on the surface and rooted into the 
pond bottom. Stems are extensively branching reaching 
24 to 36 inches in length and bear narrow leaves from 0.4 
to 2 inches long. The plants produce two types of flowers. 
Small, inconspicuous cleistogamous (non-opening and 
self-pollinating) flowers are born beneath the water’s 
surface, and showy larger whitish to pale lavender flowers 
(0.08 to 0.11 inches) are born on emergent stems. The 
fruit is an inferior (below the petals) capsule 
approximately 0.8 inches in length which contains up to 5 
brown seeds. 
 
Distribution: 
Although water howellia at one time occurred over a large 
range throughout the northwestern United States, it is 
currently found in a limited number of locations in 
California, Oregon (possibly extirpated), Washington, 
Idaho and Montana (USFWS, 2009). Water howellia is 
currently known from a total of six geographic regions: 
one in Idaho (Latah County), one in Montana (Lake and 
Missoula counties), one in California (Mendocino 
County) and three in Washington (Spokane, Clark and 
Pierce counties). For current distribution, consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Habitat:  
Water howellia can be found in ephemeral glacial ponds 
and former river oxbows that fill with spring moisture and 
dry down throughout the growing season. The upland 
flora surrounding water howellia habitat is typically 
comprised of deciduous and evergreen trees and shrubs 
including Bebb willow, Drummond’s willow, black 
cottonwood, quaking aspen, thinleaf alder, Engelmann 
spruce, Douglas fir, and lodgepole pine.  
 
The ponds themselves contain herbaceous plants such as 
water parsnip, water plantain, and inflated sedge. The 
ponds are often inhabited by the introduced reed 
canarygrass (Lichthardt and Gray, 2003). 
 
Adaptation 
Due to low genetic variability, water howellia is limited to 
very specific habitats within its range (USFWS 1994).  
 
 

 

WATER HOWELLIA 
Howellia aquatilis A. Gray 

Plant Symbol = HOAQ 

Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Idaho Plant Materials 
Program 

Figure 1. Water howellia. Photo by Dieter Wilken. 

 

Alternate Names 
This species has no known alternate names. 
 
Uses 
Water howellia forms a minor component of the aquatic 
flora in a limited number of wetlands, ponds and sloughs 
in the Pacific Northwest. It likely provides habitat for 
aquatic animals in the locations where it is found. It is 
also occasionally eaten by large animals. 
 
Status 
Water howellia was federally listed by the USDI Fish and 
Wildlife Service (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service) as 
threatened in 1994 (USFWS, 1994) and is also considered 
threatened in the states of  Idaho, Oregon, Washington 
and Montana (Montana Natural Heritage Program, 2009; 
Oregon Department of Agriculture, 2009; State of Idaho, 
2009; Washington State, 2009). In Washington State, 
howellia carries a rank of S2S3, and in Montana it is 
ranked G3, S2, while it is ranked S1 in Oregon. Howellia 
is not listed by the state of California; however it has a 
Heritage rank of G3/S1.2 and a California Native Plant 
Society rank of 2.2 (CA Department of Fish and Game, 
2009) and is considered critically imperiled in that state 
by Natureserve (2009). Natureserve additionally lists 
water howellia as critically imperiled in Oregon and Idaho 
and imperiled in Montana and Washington (Natureserve, 
2009). 
 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State Department 
of Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., 

 

 

State of Idaho. 2009. Federal threatened and endangered 

species in Idaho. [Online]. Available at  
www.species.idaho.gov (accessed 23 Dec 2009) 
Idaho Governor’s office of conservation. Boise, ID. 
USDI Fish and Wildlife Service. 1994. Endangered and 

threatened wildlife and plants; the plant, water 
howellia (Howellia aquatilis), determined to be a 
threatened species. Federal Register. 59 (134): 
35860-35864. 

Washington State. 2009. List of Plants Tracked by the 
Washington Natural Heritage Program. [Online]. 
Available at 
http://www1.dnr.wa.gov/nhp/refdesk/lists/plantrnk.ht
ml (accessed 19 Dec 2009). Washington State 
Department of Natural Resources. Seattle, WA. 

 
Prepared By 
Derek Tilley; Range Scientist, USDA NRCS Plant 
Materials Center, Aberdeen, Idaho. 
 
Dan Ogle; Plant Materials Specialist, USDA NRCS, 
Boise, Idaho. 
 
Loren St. John; Team Leader, USDA NRCS Plant 
Materials Center, Aberdeen, Idaho. 
 
Citation 
Tilley, D., D. Ogle, and L. St. John. 2009. Plant  guide for 
water howellia (Howellia aquatilis). USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Idaho Plant Materials 
Center. Aberdeen, ID. 83210. 

Published February, 2010 

Edited: 23Dec2009djt; 04Jan10dgo; 04Jan10lsj 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

 

Establishment 
Howellia is limited by specific requirements for seed 
germination. Seed germinates in the fall when a pond has 
dried and the bottom is exposed to the air, thus 
reestablishment is dependent upon proper moisture 
conditions, and populations are vulnerable to abnormally 
wet or dry periods. Regeneration of populations require 
summer flowering, dry-down of the occupied portion of 
the pond, slight refilling in the fall and full filling the 
following spring (Reeves and Woessner, 2004). 
 
Management 
Water howellia habitat is threatened by logging, 
commercial and residential development, grazing and 
encroachment from invasive species such as reed 
canarygrass and purple loosestrife (USDI Fish and 
Wildlife Service, 1994). Recommended management 
strategies include controlling invasive species and 
limiting disturbances (logging, development) that might 
affect the hydrologic requirements of the species. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Reed canarygrass and other invasive species threaten 
water howellia and its habitat by their ability to rapidly 
form dense monocultures and out-compete native species 
for available resources. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
This species is vulnerable to extirpation due to large 
variation in annual numbers, limited available habitat and 
low genetic variability (USFWS, 1994). 
 
References 
California Department of Fish and Game. 2009. Special 

Vascular Plants, Bryophytes, and Lichens List. 
Natural Diversity Database. Quarterly publication. 71 
pp. 

Lichthardt, J., and K. Gray. 2003. Monitoring of Howellia 

aquatilis (water howellia) and its habitat at the 
Harvard-Palouse River flood plain site, Idaho: fourth-
year results. Idaho Department of Fish and Game. 
Boise, ID. 

Montana Natural Heritage Program. 2009. Plant species 

of concern. [Online]. Available at 
http://mtnhp.org/SpeciesOfConcern/?AorPp 
(accessed 22 Dec 2009). Helena, MT. 

NatureServe. 2009. NatureServe Explorer: An online 

encyclopedia of life [web application]. Version 7.1. 
NatureServe, Arlington, Virginia. Available 
http://www.natureserve.org/explorer. (Accessed: 25 
Dec 2009).  

Oregon Department of Agriculture. 2009. Oregon listed 

plants. [Online]. Available at  
http://oregon.gov/ODA/PLANT/CONSERVATION/s
tatelist.shtml (accessed 20 Dec 2009). Portland, OR. 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 
 
 

 

