  

 

Natural Resources Conservation Service  
SCARLET GILIA  

Ipomopsis aggregata (Pursh) V.E. Grant 

Plant Symbol = IPAG 

Common Names:  Skyrocket, skunkflower, scarlet trumpet flower 
Scientific Names:  Gilia aggregata, Cantua aggregata 

Plant Guide 

Description 
General: Phlox Family (Polemoniaceae). Scarlet gilia is a biennial to 
short-lived perennial forb arising from a basal rosette and taproot.  
Individual plants remain in rosette form for one to many years and 
typically die after flowering (Fertig, 2017).  The Scarlet gilia’s 
lifespan varies, but one study found an average lifespan of 4.8 years 
with no plants surviving after ten years (Campbel, 1997).  In 
production trials conducted at Rocky Mountain Research Station, the 
proportion of plants behaving as biennials was approximately 99%. A 
very few were noted as possibly carrying over to the following year, 
but those may have been seed that germinated a year later (Jensen, 
2017). Mature plants can reach as much as 1 m (3 ft) tall, but plants 
typically range from 0.5 to 0.6 m (18 to 24 in) in height. The basal 
leaves are 2 to 8 cm (0.8 to 3.1 in) long and highly pinnatifid with 
narrow segments. The stem leaves reduce further up the stem. The 
flowers are typically scarlet as in varieties aggregata, arizonica and 
maculata, but can be white, salmon or pink in variety macrosiphon. 
Flowers are long tubular (1.5 to 5 cm long) with five spreading petals. 
The fruit is a 5 to 10 mm (0.2 to 0.4 in) capsule bearing 1 to several, 2 to 4 mm long seeds. As is typical in the phlox family, 
the seeds become mucilaginous (slimy) when wet (Welsh et al., 2003). Jensen (2017) reported that from 36 collections, seed 
weights ranged from 280,000 to 700,000 seeds/lb. 

Distribution:  Scarlet gilia is located throughout western North America from Montana south to Texas and west to British 
Columbia south to California. For current distribution, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  

Adaptation 
Scarlet gilia is typically found in sunny openings in mountain shrub, 
sagebrush steppe, and alpine timber communities from 1,100 to 3,300 m 
(3,600 to 10,800 ft) elevations in the Sierra, Intermountain and Rocky 
Mountain regions (Hickman, 1993; Welsh et al., 2003).  It is very drought 
tolerant, shade intolerant, and has higher germination success and seedling 
survival in disturbed soils (Juenger and Bergelson, 2000).  Scarlet gilia 
prefers medium to coarse loam to sandy loam soils in areas receiving 250 
to 1,000 mm (10 to 40 in) mean annual precipitation.   

Uses 
Wildlife: Scarlet gilia can be included in conservation and wildlife habitat plantings to increase species diversity. Plants are 
highly palatable, with the flowering stocks regularly utilized by native wildlife and livestock (Fertig, 2017).  The timing of 
herbivory can influence plant response, with overcompensation (increased flower and seed production compared to non-
grazed plants) observed with early season herbivory and reduced flowers and seed production with late season herbivory 
(Paige and Whitham, 1987; Paige 1999).   
 
Pollinator: Hummingbirds and bumblebees are attracted to this showy species from which they extract nectar (Irwin, 1998). 
Caruso (1999) documented visitation by broad-tailed (Selasphorus platycercus) and rufous (Selasphorus rufus) 

 

hummingbirds at a study site in Colorado. Scarlet gilia typically flowers in early- to mid-summer depending on the region. In 
the Intermountain and Rocky Mountain West, flowering dates ranged from April to July (Jensen, 2017). Flowers are self-
incompatible and rely on cross pollination for seed production (Wolf et al 1986).  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site (http://plants.usda.gov/) and your state’s Department of Natural Resources for this 
plant’s current status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Planting Guidelines 
Based on a seeding rate of 50 pure live seeds (PLS) per foot, the full stand seeding rate is approximately 6 lbs/ac. The 
seeding rate should be adjusted to match the desired percentage within a seed mixture. Seed can be planted with a drill or 
broadcast seeder. Very shallow seeding depths, on the surface to no more than 3 mm (1/8 in) are typically recommended; 
however, Jensen (2017) observed no differences in emergence when planted at depths between 1.5 and 4 cm. Juenger and 
Bergelson (2000) found that tilling prior to broadcast seeding increased establishment significantly.  
 
Management 
Scarlet gilia should be used as a minor component of pollinator and restoration seed mixtures.  Management strategies should 
be based on the key species in the established plant community.  Grazing should be deferred on seeded lands for at least two 
growing seasons to allow for full stand establishment (Ogle et al., 2011).   
 
Environmental Concerns 
Scarlet gilia is native to western North America. It does not pose any environmental concern to native plant communities 
under proper management.  
 
Seed Production 
Seed collection dates for Intermountain West populations ranged from the last week of June through the last week of 
September (Jensen, 2017). Small scale production fields and wildland collections can be harvested by beating the seeds off 
the plant into a bin or bag, or by clipping the flower heads. Small amounts can be dried in paper bags at room temperature 
with the top of the bag covered with open weave cloth. Larger amounts are dried on tarps in a greenhouse or shed. Plants are 
covered with garden row cover to prevent seed loss from the potentially explosive dehiscence of the capsule (Skinner, 2007). 
Seed is cleaned by running the collected material through an air-screen cleaner. Clean seed is stored in controlled conditions 
at 40 degrees Fahrenheit and 20 to 40% relative humidity.  
 
There are many issues preventing scarlet gilia from being adopted into large scale seed production. Scarlet gilia is usually 
considered a biennial, but may remain in the rosette stage for several years before flowering and is probably more properly 
considered a monocarpic perennial (Skinner, 2007). Because the plants flower indeterminately and the capsules dehisce 
forcefully upon ripening, a single harvest is inefficient for gathering a significant amount of seed. Multiple hand harvests are 
difficult and time-consuming. There is wide variation in seed size depending mostly on pollinator effectiveness and therefore 
the number of seeds set per capsule (Wolf et al 1986). Shock et al (2014) reported yields of 47, 61 and 64 lbs/acre from a 
single harvest with 0, 4 and 8 inches supplemental precipitation respectively (Shock et al., 2015). Rocky Mountain Research 
Station observed yields of 25, 87, 110 lbs/acre extrapolated from production beds from multiple harvests (Jensen, 2017). 
 
Field observations suggest browsing scarlet gilia plants resulted in bushier canopies with increased flower numbers (Paige 
and Whitham, 1987; Paige 1999). However, Jensen et al (2011) showed clipping treatments conducted in June and July 
resulted in approximate fourfold reduction in the number of flowers as compared to the control plants. A second set of trials 
looking at earlier clipping dates (beginning in April) again showed no overcompensation among any treatments (Jensen, 
2017).  
 
Plant Production 
Seed from montane Oregon germinated poorly under all conditions (Link 1993); however, Rose et al (1998) reported that no 
pretreatment is necessary for germination. Skinner (2007) found best results (90% emergence) with 45 days of cold moist 
stratification for a seed collection from Paradise Creek drainage near Pullman, Washington. Unpublished data from trials 
conducted at the Pullman Plant Materials Center showed that 5% emergence occurred without stratification and that 90 or 
more days of cold, moist stratification did not increase emergence beyond that achieved with 45 days. Slightly higher 
emergence was obtained from plants grown outdoors under cool, fluctuating growing conditions but these plants were not 
ready to be transplanted to the field the same spring (Skinner, 2007).  
 
Greenhouse transplant production can take four months and should be started in late November or early December.  Seed can 
be sown into 10 cubic inch conetainers filled with a standard soil mix and covered lightly. A thin layer of pea gravel or sand 

 

should be applied to the top of the planting soil to prevent seeds from floating during watering. Conetainers should be 
watered deeply and placed outside before being moved to the greenhouse in early to mid-January. Alternately, seed can be 
moist stratified in a refrigerator for 45 days before sowing in the greenhouse.  Emergence may begin in four to eight days and 
it may take two weeks for the seedling to become established.  Once established, the plant enters and active growing phase 
and should remain in the green house for three months.  Watering deeply should occur daily and a water soluble fertilizer 
should be added weekly.  Hardening can take place in late March or early April depending on the weather.  Plants can be 
moved into a cold frame and watered every other day when cool, every day when hot.  Hardening may take two to four weeks 
and the plant should be ready for transplant by early May (Skinner, 2007).  
 
Stem cuttings can be propagated in a frame (Mirov & Kraebel 1939). 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area of origin)  
Limited quantities of wildland collected seed may be available from commercial sources. There are currently no commercial 
releases of scarlet gilia. Seed sources should be selected based on the local climate, resistance to local pests, and intended 
use. Consult with your local land grant university, local extension or local USDA NRCS office for recommendations for use 
in your area. 
 
Literature Cited 
Campbell, D.R. 1997. Genetic and Environmental Variation in Life-History Traits of a Monocarpic Perennial: A Decade-

Caruso, C.M. 1999. Pollination of Ipomopsis aggregata (Polemoniaceae): effects of intra- vs. interspecific competition. 

Long Field Experiment.  Evolution. 51(2): 373-382 

American Journal of Botany. 86(5): 663-668. 

Fertig, W. 2017. USDA Forest Service Plant of the Week: Scarlet gilia (Ipomopsis aggregata). 

https://www.fs.fed.us/wildflowers/plant-of-the-week/ipomopsis_aggregata.shtml. Accessed January 5, 2017. 

Hickman, J.C. (ed.) 1993. The Jepson Manual: Higher Plants of California. University of CA Press, Berkeley.  
Jensen, S. 2017. USFS Rocky Mountain Research Station. Provo, UT. Personal Communication, 17 January, 2017. 
Jensen, S., Stanton, S., Nielson, M., Stettler, J., Matthews, D., Ersfeld, T. and C. Sample. 2011. Selecting and growing Great 

Basin natives. In: Great Basin Native Plant Project, 2010 Progress Report. Pp. 64-68. 

Juenger, T., and J. Bergelson. 2000. Factors limiting rosette recruitment in scarlet gilia, Ipomopsis aggregate: seed and 

disturbance limitation. Oecologia. 123: 358-363 

Link, Ellen (ed.). 1993. Native Plant Propagation Techniques for National Parks Interim Guide. USDA SCS Rose Lake Plant 

Materials Center and USDI National Park Service. East Lansing, Michigan. 240 pp. 

Mirov, N.T., and C.J. Kraebel. 1939. Collecting and Handling Seeds of Wild Plants. Civilian Conservation Corps Forestry 

publ. No.5. US Government Printing Office. Washington, DC. 

Ogle, D., St. John, L. Stannard, M. and L. Holzworth. 2011. Technical Note 24: Conservation plant species for the 

Intermountain West. USDA-NRCS, Boise, ID-Salt Lake City, UT-Spokane, WA. ID-TN 24. 57p. 

Paige, K.N. 1999. Regrowth following ungulate herbivory in Ipomopsis aggregata: geographic evidence for 

Shock, C., Feibert, E., Rivera, A., and L. Saunders. 2015. Irrigation requirements of native wildflower species for seed 
production for the third set of species started in the fall of 2012. In: Great Basin Native Plant Project 2014 Progress 
Report. Pp. 134-144. 

Skinner, D. 2007. Propagation protocol for production of Container (plug) Ipomopsis aggregata (Pursh) V. Grant plants 10 

cu. in.; USDA NRCS - Pullman Plant Materials Center Pullman, Washington. In: Native Plant Network. URL: 
http://NativePlantNetwork.org (accessed 2017/01/05). US Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, National Center 
for Reforestation, Nurseries, and Genetic Resources. 

Welsh, S.L., Atwood, N.D., Goodrich, S., and L.C. Higgins. 2003. A Utah Flora. Third Edition, revised. Brigham Young 

University, Provo, UT. 

Wolf, L.L., F. R. Hainsworth, T. Mercier, and R. Benjamin. 1986. Seed Size Variation and Pollinator Uncertainty in 

Ipomopsis aggregata (Polemoniaceae). Journal of Ecology 74:361-371. 

 
Citation 
Tilley, D., T. Pickett, and C. Bernau. 2016. Plant guide for scarlet gilia (Ipomopsis aggregata). USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service. Idaho and Washington Plant Materials Program. 
 
Published  January 17, 2017 

Paige, K.N, and T.G. Whitham. 1987. Overcompensation in response to mammalian herbivory: the advantages of being 

Rose, R., Caryn E.C. Chachulski, and D.L. Haase. 1998. Propagation of Pacific Northwest Native Plants. Oregon State 

overcompensation.  Oecologia.  118: 316-323 

eaten.  American Naturalist. 129: 407-416 

University Press, Corvallis, OR. 248 pp. 

 

For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation District at 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the  
Plant Materials Program Web site: 
http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability of other Web sites. 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination against its customers, employees, and applicants for 
employment on the bases of race, color, national origin, age, disability, sex, gender identity, religion, reprisal, and where applicable, 
political beliefs, marital status, familial or parental status, sexual orientation, or all or part of an individual's income is derived from 
any public assistance program, or protected genetic information in employment or in any program or activity conducted or 
funded by the Department. (Not all prohibited bases will apply to all programs and/or employment activities.)  
 
If you wish to file an employment complaint, you must contact your agency's EEO Counselor (PDF) within 45 days of the date 
of the alleged discriminatory act, event, or in the case of a personnel action. Additional information can be found online at 
http://www.ascr.usda.gov/complaint_filing_file.html.  
 
If you wish to file a Civil Rights program complaint of discrimination, complete the USDA Program Discrimination Complaint 
Form (PDF), found online at http://www.ascr.usda.gov/complaint_filing_cust.html, or at any USDA office, or call (866) 632-
9992 to request the form. You may also write a letter containing all of the information requested in the form. Send your 
completed complaint form or letter to us by mail at U.S. Department of Agriculture, Director, Office of Adjudication, 1400 
Independence Avenue, S.W., Washington, D.C. 20250-9410, by fax (202) 690-7442 or email at program.intake@usda.gov.  
Individuals who are deaf, hard of hearing or have speech disabilities and you wish to file either an EEO or program complaint 
please contact USDA through the Federal Relay Service at (800) 877-8339 or (800) 845-6136 (in Spanish).  
 
Persons with disabilities who wish to file a program complaint, please see information above on how to contact us by mail directly 
or by email. If you require alternative means of communication for program information (e.g., Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) 
please contact USDA's TARGET Center at (202) 720-2600 (voice and TDD).  
 
For any other information dealing with Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) issues, persons should either contact 
the USDA SNAP Hotline Number at (800) 221-5689, which is also in Spanish or call the State Information/Hotline Numbers.  
For any other information not pertaining to civil rights, please refer to the listing of the USDA Agencies and Offices for specific 
agency information. 
 

Helping People Help the Land 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

