 
 

 

Plant Guide

status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  Paleyellow 
iris is listed as an invasive, banned, prohibited, 
designated, or noxious weed in Connecticut, 
Massachusetts, Montana, New Hampshire, Oregon, and 
Washington. 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation 
if not properly managed.  Please consult with your local 
NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service 
office, state natural resource, or state agriculture 
department regarding its status and use. Weed information 
is also available from the PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov. Please consult the Related Web 
Sites on the Plant Profile for this species for further 
information. This species is weedy in many riparian 
habitats.   
 
Description 
General: Paleyellow iris is perennial and grows from a 
stout rhizome ranging in diameter from 0.4 to 1.6 inches 
(1-4 centimeters).  The sap of the rhizome is black. Roots 
are normally four to eight inches (10-20 centimeters) 
long, but may reach lengths of 12 inches (30 centimeters). 
The hairless (glabrous) plants form clones when rhizomes 
separate.  Each individual (ramet) produces 10 leaves 
covered with a fine waxy powder giving the leaves a 
whitish or bluish (glaucous) cast.  The sword-shaped 
leaves have a raised midrib and are about 0.4 to 1.2 inches 
(10-30 centimeters) wide.  Leaves range from 20 to 40 
inches (50-100 centimeters) in length, or about as long as 
the flowering stem.  Typical of iris, flowers form on a 
leafless stalk (peduncle) that is round in cross-section and 
is often branched.  Beneath each flower is a large solitary 
bract (spathe), with thin, dry, margins that lack green 
color (scarious).  Flower pedicels are about 1.5 to three 
inches (4-8 centimeters) long, about the length of the 
ovary.  Flowers are about three to four inches (8-10 
centimeters) in diameter, and vary in color from pale 
yellow to nearly orange, pale yellow being the most 
common color (see Figure 1).  There are six perianth 
segments (sepals and petals) fused at their bases to form a 
tube and situated on top of the ovary.  The sepals are 
variable in form but generally curve outward, have short 
claws, are commonly purple-veined, and have an orange 
spot near the base.  The petals are smaller than the sepals 
and curve upward.  The style has three petal-like yellow 
branches, and on the underside near the tip, is a small lip-
like stigma.  The three stamens are hidden beneath the 
three style branches.  The elliptic capsules are 1.5 to three 
inches (4-8 centimeters) long and have three chambers 
each with two rows of seeds.  The seeds are smooth, disc-

PALEYELLOW IRIS 

Iris pseudacorus L. 

Plant Symbol = IRPS 

Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Montana State Office 

 
Figure 1. Paleyellow iris flowers. Photo by Jane Mangold, Montana 
State University, Bozeman, Montana 
 
Alternate Names 
Yellowflag iris 
 
Uses 
Paleyellow iris has been used as a horticultural plant. 
Because paleyellow iris tolerates low oxygen, it lives in 
areas with high levels of soluble organics and it may 
reduce the organic load by 25% over one year.  Within a 
24-hour period, rhizome reductions of Escherichia coli 
were 50 percent, Salmonella 70 percent, and Enterocoli 
60 percent.  It has been suggested that paleyellow iris can 
remove heavy metals efficiently and economically from 
wastewater because of its ability to absorb the metals and 
survive in unfavorable conditions. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 

 

shaped, and variable in size, turning dark brown when 
mature. 
 
Distribution: In its native range, paleyellow iris occurs in 
North Africa and all European countries except Iceland. It 
occurs in the Caucasus, Western Asia, and New Zealand. 
In North America it has been reported in all but 13 states 
and provinces.  For current distribution, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Habitat: Paleyellow iris forms dense clumps in shallow 
water and wet places around lakes and ponds, and along 
streambanks. 
 
Adaptation 
Paleyellow iris grows in a wide variety of soil types 
ranging from gravel beds on beaches (shingle) where 
rhizomes grow over bare rock with roots penetrating into 
underlying soil, to waterlogged clay soils (gleys).  It 
usually grows on sites with continuously high soil-water 
content, but not necessarily submerged soil, and it can 
grow on dry sandy soil.  Rhizome clumps can form mats 
floating in water.  Paleyellow iris grows on peats and 
permanently submerged organic and inorganic soils at 
water’s edge.  In Europe, it persists in the higher zones of 
salt marshes and in estuarine water with 24‰ salinity. It 
), but is found in fens 
is less common on chalk (CaCO3
and in fen woodland. It tolerates soil pH ranging from 3.6 
to 7.7.  It requires high levels of soil nitrogen. It is 
associated with depressions within terrestrial habitats and 
groundwater seepages.  It tolerates high levels of organics 
and low levels of oxygen. 
 
Establishment 
Paleyellow iris grows from both rhizomes and seeds. 
Rhizomes increase in size from year to year unless 
flowering occurs or the rhizomes branch, which typically 
occurs after flowering.  The seasonal accumulation of 
storage materials in the rhizomes results in annual 
segments that can be counted to determine their age. 
Rhizomes have air spaces in the cellular tissues (lacunae) 
that facilitate survival in low oxygen conditions 
characteristic of flooding.  Carbohydrates are stored in 
rhizomes, roots, leaf bases, and developing flower shoots. 
Excavated rhizomes of paleyellow iris continued growing 
for three months indoors without water indicating they 
can tolerate extensive drought. 
Most flowers bloom between May and July, but flowering 
can persist into November.  Flowers are pollinated when 
insects pass between the stamens and the outer perianth 
segments to obtain nectar, brushing pollen from their 
backs between the two lips of the stigma.  Two flower 
forms are reported with differences in the distance 
between the style branches and the outer perianth 
segments, and thus the flower forms differ in the insect 
species that are effective pollinators.  In Europe, insect 
species visiting flowers include the bumblebees (Bombus 
pascuorum, the most common visitor, B. hortum, B. 

 

 

ruderarius, B. vestalis Hymenoptera), honey bees (Apis 
mellifera, Hymenoptera), solitary bee (Osmia rufa, 
Hymenoptera) and the hoverfly (Rhingia rostrata, 
Diptera).  Seeds are produced between July and 
November. European studies found an average of 5.6 seed 
pods per plant; however the number of seeds per pod 
varied from 32 to 120 with many seeds undeveloped and 
not viable. 
 
The percentage of seed that germinate is variable. 
Laboratory studies found germination of freshly collected 
seeds was 48 percent at 41 degrees Fahrenheit (five 
degrees Centigrade).  Scarification increased germination 
to 70 percent and washing seeds with xylene to remove a 
fat-like substance from the seed coat increased 
germination to over 80 percent.  Most seeds germinate in 
the spring, but some germinate in the summer. Seeds 
rarely germinate in autumn.  In field situations, 20 percent 
of the seeds dispersed in October germinated the spring of 
the next year, with an additional 20 percent germinating 
the following year. 
 
At germination under normal conditions, the root radical 
emerges and grows for about five days.  The shoot 
cotyledon sheath emerges on the seventh day, and the first 
leaf appears on the tenth day.  After one month, seedlings 
can have three leaves, lateral roots, and adventitious roots. 
The proportion of roots relative to shoots is high during 
early seedling development, which is believed to prevent 
the seedling from being washed out of muddy substrates 
and improves survival. 
 
Management 
See Control below. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Paleyellow iris can be invasive. See Environmental 
Concerns below. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
Paleyellow iris forms dense colonies in riparian areas 
where it crowds-out native species, thus reducing plant 
community diversity.  This may result in altered riparian 
area function and reduced habitat for wildlife and 
pollinators.  In eastern states, reduced native sedges and 
rushes that support waterfowl is associated with 
paleyellow iris populations.  Clumps of paleyellow iris 
may restrict water flow in irrigation and flood control 
ditches.  The glycoside levels in leaves make the plant 
unpalatable to livestock and wildlife.  Not only do grazers 
avoid eating the plant, but they avoid grazing palatable 
plants growing next to dense clumps of paleyellow iris. 
Animals eating hay containing paleyellow iris commonly 
experience gastroenteritis. Cattle in Scotland suffered 
acute diarrhea after eating rhizomes.  Paleyellow iris is a 
skin irritant. 
 
 

 

 

References 
Bussuyt, B., B. DeFré and M. Hoffmann. 2005. 

Abundance and flowering success patterns in a short-
term grazed grassland: early evidence of facilitation. 
Journal of Ecology 93: 1104-1114. 

Schlüter,  U.  and  R.M.M.  Crawford.  2001.  Long-term 
anoxia tolerance in leaves of Acorus calamus L. and 
Iris pseudacorus L. Journal of Experimental Botany. 
52:2213-2225. 

Sutherland, W.J. 1990. Biological flora of the British 

Isles. No. 169 Iris pseudacorus L. Journal of Ecology 
78: 833-848. 

 
Prepared By 
Jim Jacobs  
USDA, NRCS, Montana State Office, Bozeman, Montana 
Melissa Graves  
Extension Weeds and IPM Specialist, Montana State 
University, Bozeman, Montana 
Jane Mangold  
Extension Invasive Plant Specialist, Montana State 
University, Bozeman, Montana 
 
Citation 
Jacobs, J., M. Graves, and J. Mangold. 2010 Plant guide 
for paleyellow iris (Iris pseudacorus). USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Montana State Office. 
Bozeman, Montana 59715. 

Published September, 2010 
 
Edited: 11Aug2010 jsj, 12Augjm, 13Augkb 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

Control 
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 
area, how to use it safely, and for regulatory information 
about herbicide application in riparian areas.  Always read 
label and safety instructions for each control method. 
Trade names and control measures appear in this 
document only to provide specific information. USDA 
NRCS does not guarantee or warranty the products and 
control methods named, and other products may be 
equally effective. 
 
Glyphosate is the most widely used chemical for 
paleyellow iris management.  A five percent solution of 
an aquatic label glyphosate applied to actively growing 
foliage in late spring or early summer has been most 
effective.  Glyphosate is a non-selective herbicide and 
revegetation to provide competition to re-establishing 
paleyellow iris may be necessary. 
 
Digging or grubbing rhizomes may be effective if all 
rhizomes are removed.  Retreatment to remove missed 
rhizomes will most likely be necessary. Removed 
rhizomes should be disposed of in a landfill away from 
riparian areas.  Gloves and skin protection are 
recommended to prevent skin irritation.  Repeated 
mowing or clipping may prevent seed production or 
reduce spread by rhizomes by depleting energy reserves. 
Using mowing equipment that simultaneously applies 
herbicide (wet blade) may be a way to target paleyellow 
iris for herbicide control while reducing non-target 
impacts.  Prescribed burning, fertilization or irrigation do 
not effectively control paleyellow iris. However, flooding 
may reduce populations if water levels are maintained for 
over 65 days. 
Grazing management is not recommended for paleyellow 
iris because it is usually avoided by cattle, sheep, goats, 
horses, and rabbits because of glycosides in the leaves. 
Unpublished reports indicate sheep try early season 
leaves, and cattle eat leaves down to the rhizomes if 
leaves are present and short in the autumn.  
 
There are no biological control agents developed or 
approved for the management of paleyellow iris in the 
United States.  A list of species that feed on paleyellow 
iris is provided by Sutherland (1990). 
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Not applicable. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
None available. 
 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 
 
 
 

 

