 
 

 

Plant Guide

 
Hummingbirds are attracted to silky lupine and the plant 
is recognized by pollination ecologists as attracting large 
numbers of native bees.  It is an important pollen source 
for bumble bees and a nectar source for honey bees (Lady 
Bird Johnson Wildflower Center, Online). 

Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Weediness 
Because of its toxic qualities to domestic livestock, stock 
growers may consider silky lupine to be a weed where it 
is prevalent and interferes with livestock grazing. 
 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation 
if not properly managed.  Please consult with your local 
NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service 
office, state natural resource, or state agriculture 
department regarding its status and use.  Weed 
information is also available from the PLANTS Web site 
at http://plants.usda.gov/.  Please consult the Related Web 
Sites on the Plant Profile for this species for further 
information. 

Ethnobotany 
The Okanagan-Colville tribe of British Columbia used a 
mixture of strained, pounded seeds mixed with water as 
an eye medicine.  They also used the plant for bedding 
and floor covering in sweathouses.  They used the plant 
bloom as an indication that groundhogs were fat enough 
to eat and recognized the plant as being a favorite food of 
the marmot.  The Thompson Indians of British Columbia 
considered the plant poisonous but thought that horses 
consumed the plant as a medicine (Native American 
Ethnobotany Database). 

Description 
General:  Pea Family (Fabaceae).  Silky lupine is a native, 
perennial, tap-rooted, cool season legume.  There are 
usually several solid stems at the base of the plant that are 
2-8 mm (0.08-0.31 in) in diameter.  Total plant height, 
including the inflorescence ranges from 4-14 dm (25.75-
55.12 in) tall.  Leaves are palm-shaped with 5-9 leaflets 
(finger-like segments).  Leaflets are usually densely 
pubescent on both faces.  Flowers are small and spurred 
forming racemes and are dense in bud, becoming loose 
during flowering.  Racemes are 12-25 cm (4.72-9.84 in) 
long.  Flower petals are either vivid blue with white or 
yellow white eyespot, pale blue, or whitish with brown 

SILKY LUPINE 
Lupinus sericeus Pursh 

Plant Symbol = LUSE4 

Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Idaho Plant Materials 
Center 

Silky lupine.  Photo by Paul Alabak, University of Montana. 

 

Alternate Names 
Common Alternate Names:  blue-bonnet lupine 

Uses 
Silky lupine is consumed by white-tailed deer, bighorn 
sheep, upland game birds, small nongame birds and small 
mammals.  Livestock will utilize the plant but it is 
poisonous to cattle and sheep.  Palatability is rated poor to 
fair for cattle and horses and fair for sheep (Matthews, 
1993).  It may be unpalatable to elk (Tracy and 
McNaughton, 1997).  It is rated poor in terms of 
nutritional value.  Silky lupine provides fair to good cover 
for small mammals and birds.  Its ability to fix nitrogen 
allows it to colonize disturbed, low fertility soils but is 
rated low to medium for control of soil erosion and for 
long term revegetation (Matthews, 1993). 

 

eyespot.  The seed pod is somewhat flattened and bears 2-
5 seeds (Cronquist and others, 1989; Pratt and others 
2002).   
 
The genus Lupinus has over 150 species in North and 
South America and the morphological uniformity of the 
flower and pod and the lack of genetic barriers to 
interbreeding contribute to the difficulty of taxonomic 
classification (Cronquist, 1989).  There is much 
disagreement concerning recognized subspecies of silky 
lupine (Matthews, 1993).  The PLANTS database 
recognizes three subspecies, ssp. huffmanii, ssp. 
marianus, and ssp. sericeus.  Subspecies marianus has 
leaflets with sparse pubescence to glabrous on the upper 
surface and is found mostly in southern Utah.  Subspecies 
sericeus has leaflets that are uniformly puberulent to 
pilose on the upper surface and is widely distributed 
(Welsh, 1978). No published descriptive information on 
the taxonomy of ssp. huffmanii could be found. 

Distribution:  Silky lupine is found in Manitoba and 
British Columbia south into Montana, South Dakota, 
Wyoming, Colorado Arizona, and New Mexico.  It is also 
found in Washington, Oregon, Idaho, Nevada, and Utah.  
The subspecies huffmanii is found in Utah and Arizona 
and ssp. marianus is localized to Utah.  The subspecies 
sericeus has the same distribution as L. sericeus.  For 
current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page 
for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 

Habitat:  Silky lupine is found in grasslands, sagebrush, 
mountain brush plant communities and in aspen and 
coniferous forests (Matthews, 1993).  Silky lupine is 
commonly found in association with sedges (Carex spp.), 
prairie junegrass (Koeleria cristata), Idaho fescue 
(Festuca idahoensis), Sandberg bluegrass (Poa secunda), 
and bluebunch wheatgrass (Pseudoroegneria spicata).  It 
is also found with Gambel oak (Quercus gambelii), 
ninebark (Physocarpus malvaceus), serviceberry 
(Amelanchier spp.), mountain mahogany (Cercocarpus 
spp.), arrowleaf balsamroot (Balsamorhiza sagittata), and 
western yarrow (Achillea millefolium var. occidentalis) 
(Matthews, 1993). 

Adaptation 
Silky lupine is adapted to a broad range of soil textures 
but found most commonly on coarse textured and well 
drained, non-saline soils.  It is found in areas receiving 
10-18+ inches (254-457+ mm) of annual precipitation and 
at elevations ranging from 820 feet (250 m) in the 
Columbia Basin of Washington to 10,000 feet (3,048 m) 
in Utah.  It prefers full sun but will tolerate partial shade.  
It grows in soils with pH 7-7.5 (PLANTS Database). 

Establishment 
In western Montana plant growth begins in early May and 
flowering occurs in June and July.  Seeds disseminate in 
August (Matthews, 1993). 

 

 

The seed coat of silky lupine is hard, causing a physical 
dormancy.  The appearance of seedlings after forest fires 
is indicative of a physical dormancy that is broken by 
high temperatures (Hosokawa and others, 2004).  Monsen 
and others (2004) report that silky lupine establishes well 
when dormant seeded on disturbed sites by drilling to a 
depth of ¼ inch or by broadcasting.  Full plant 
development may be slow with flowering not occurring 
for 3-5 years. 

Management 
Sheep are frequently poisoned by feeding on lupine.  
Signs of poisoned sheep include nervousness, excessive 
salivation, lethargy, difficulty breathing, convulsions, 
coma, and death.  Poisoning usually occurs when hungry 
animals are allowed to graze lupine.  Cattle grazing lupine 
between the 40th and 100th days of gestation often give 
birth to calves with crooked legs and other congenital 
deformities.  Consumed hay containing lupine has also 
caused death of sheep and cattle.  The amount of lupine 
that will kill an animal varies with the stage of plant 
growth.  Sheep consuming desirable forage may not be 
affected by occasionally eating a small amount of lupine 
(0.04 pound per day), but will develop clinical signs of 
poisoning if the same amount is consumed for 3-4 days.  
Cattle may be poisoned by consuming 1-12 pounds of 
lupine without other forage (Panter and others, 2011). 
 
Poisoning can be reduced by keeping hungry animals 
away from lupines during the early growth stage, in late 
summer when the plant is in the highly toxic seed stage, 
and from dense stands at all times.  Keeping cows away 
from lupine during the 40th to 100th days of gestation will 
prevent most deformities.  There is no known treatment 
for lupine poisoning (Panter and others, 2011). 

Pests and Potential Problems 
Greenhouse grown plants are susceptible to root rot and 
fungus attack (Hosokawa and others, 2004).  The authors 
have observed natural stands of silky lupine that have 
been consumed by Mormon crickets. 

Environmental Concerns 
Silky lupine is a native plant that may have value for 
restoration of disturbed areas.  However, if livestock 
grazing is a major use in the area, the toxic effects of the 
plant to livestock should be taken under consideration 
when planning plant restoration components or seed 
mixes. 

Control 
Silky lupine may be controlled by herbicides.  2,4-D LV 
ester applied at 2 .0 lb. acid equivalent/acre (ae/ac) at the 
early bud stage; metsulfuron 0.9 oz ae/ ac applied to 
actively growing plants; or picloram applied at 0.25-0.5 
ae/ac to actively growing plants are recommended 
(Pacific Northwest Weed Management Handbook).  
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use it safely.  Always read and follow 

 

label and safety instructions for each control method.  
Trade names and control measures appear in this 
document only to provide specific information.  USDA 
NRCS does not guarantee or warranty the products and 
control methods named, and other products may be 
equally effective. 

Seed and Plant Production 
Seeds are collected by hand when seeds are tan to gray 
colored at maturity.  Because seeds dehisce forcefully at 
maturity, pods are cut from field plants just as they begin 
to dry and placed into paper bags for transport.  Pods are 
then spread out to dry and covered with a fine mesh cloth.  
When seeds are mature and dry, material is processed to 
remove pods and other inert matter.  Because of the hard 
seed coat, seed must be treated to break dormancy.  Seed 
is placed in a brief 5-10 second hot water bath and then 
immediately transferred to cold water.  Once seed is 
cooled, it is wrapped in moist paper towels and placed 
into refrigeration at 3°C (36°F) for 30 day stratification.  
Imbibed seeds should be inoculated with Rhizobium 
specific to lupine.  Seed is then placed into growing 
media and lightly covered.  Greenhouse temperatures are 
maintained at 20-25°C (68-78°F) during the day and 16-
18°C (60-66°F) at night.  Seeds germinate uniformly in 8 
days and time to first true leaf stage is 7-15 days.  Length 
of establishment phase is 12 weeks after which plants 
should be hardened off and transplanted.  Careful 
attention must be paid to prevent damage to the taproot 
and it is difficult to transplant.  It is best to pre-treat the 
seed and sow directly on the planting site (Hosokawa and 
others, 2004).   
 
Reported seed weights for silky lupine range from 12,873 
seeds per pound (Hosokawa and others, 2004) to 24,550 
seeds per pound (PLANTS database). 
 
There are no published reports of field production of silky 
lupine seed. 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
There are no cultivars, improved, or selected materials of 
silky lupine.  Common wildland collected seed is 
available from commercial sources (Native Seed 
Network). 

References 
Cronquist, A., Holmgren, A. Holmgren N., Reveal, J., 

Holmgren, P. 1989.  Fabales.  Intermountain Flora.  
Vascular Plants of the Intermountain West, U.S.A. 
Volume Three. The New York Botanical Garden, 
Bronx, New York.  279 p. 

Hosokawa, J., Wick, D., Luna, T.  2004.  Propagation 

protocol for production of container Lupinus sericeus 
Pursh. Plants (172 ml conetainers); USDI NPS – 
Glacier National Park, West Glacier, Montana.  
University of Idaho, College of Natural Resources, 
forest Research Nursery. Native Plant Network. 

Citation 

 

http://www.nativeplantnetwork.org (Accessed April 
17, 2012). 

Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center.  [Online].  

http://www.wildflower.org (Accessed April 17, 
2012). 

Matthews, R. 1993.  Lupinus sericeus.  In: Fire Effects 
Information System. [Online].  U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain 
Research Station, Fire Sciences Laboratory.  
http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/plants (Accessed 
April 17, 2012). 

Monsen, S., Stevens, R., Shaw, N. comps. 2004.  

Restoring Western Ranges and Wildlands.  Gen. 
Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-136-vol-2.  Fort Collins, 
CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service 
Rocky Mountain Research Station.  p 295-698 plus 
index.   

Native American Ethnobotany.  A Database of Foods, 

Drugs, Dyes and Fibers of Native American Peoples 
Derived from Plants.  University of Michigan, 
College of Arts, Sciences, and Letters 
http://herb.umd.umich.edu/ (Accessed April 17, 
2012) 

Native Seed Network.  http://www.nativeseednetwork.org

 

(Accessed April 23, 2012) 

Pacific Northwest Weed Management Handbook. Lupine 

Species (Lupinus spp).  http://pnwhandbooks.org  
(Accessed April 23, 2012) 

Panter, K., Ralphs, M., Pfister, J., Gardner, D., 

Stegelmeier, B., Lee, S., Welch, K., Green, B., Davis, 
T., Cook, D. 2011.  Plants Poisonous to Livestock in 
the Western States. United States Department of 
Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service. 
Agriculture Information Bulletin Number 415. 120 p. 

PLANTS Database. Lupinus sericeus.  [Online].  

http://plants.usda.gov. U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service.  
(Accessed April 17, 2012). 

Pratt, M., Bowns, J., Banner, R., Rasmussen, A., 2002.  
Lupine.  In: Range Plants of Utah, [Online].  Utah 
State University, USU Extension 
http://extension.usu.edu/range/ (Accessed April 19, 
2012) 

Tracy, B. and McNaughton, S. 1997.  Elk Grazing and 

Vegetation Response Following a Late Season Fire in 
Yellowstone National Park.  Plant Ecology v. 130(2).  
p 111-119. 

Welsh, S. 1978.  Utah Flora: Fabacease (Leguminosae).  
The Great Basin Naturalist. V. 38 No. 3.  Brigham 
Young University, Provo, Utah.  p 225-363. 

 
Prepared By: 
Loren St. John, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, ID 
 
Derek Tilley, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, ID 

 

St. John, L. and D. Tilley. 2012. Plant Guide for silky 
lupine (Lupinus sericeus). USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Aberdeen Plant Materials Center. 
Aberdeen, Idaho 83210. 

District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

Published May, 2012 
Edited: 23Apr2012 ls; 24Apr2012djt; 26Apr2012gm; 18May2012jab 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

