 
 

 

Plant Guide

1997).  Mammoth wildrye is generally not suitable for 
grazing and has poor to fair palatability during the spring 
and summer (Monsen et.al 2004). 
 
Status 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State Department 
of Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).  An environmental 
evaluation of ‘Volga’ mammoth wildrye conducted by the 
Plant Materials Program in 2002 indicated that the 
cultivar had a low chance of negatively affecting the 
environment, and is relatively easy to control. 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace other vegetation if 
not properly managed.  Consult with your local NRCS 
Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service office, state 
natural resource, or state agriculture department regarding 
its status and use.  Weed information is available from the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov.  Consult the 
Related Web Sites on the Plant Profile for this species for 
additional information. 
 
Description 
General: Grass Family (Poaceae).  Mammoth wildrye is 
an introduced, long-lived, rhizomatous perennial grass 
that grows to approximately 3 feet in height.  It is coarse 
stemmed with large, long, flat, and tough leaves. 
 

Culms to 100 cm (39 in) tall, 10 mm (0.04 in) diameter 
and scaberulous pubescent below raceme.  Leaf sheath is 
membranous at the margin and ligule is approximately 2 
mm (0.008 in) long, membranous with a truncate apex.  
The leaf blade is glaucous green 20-40 cm (8-16 in) long 
and 1.5 cm (0.6 in) wide, the lower surface smooth and 
the upper surface and margin scabrous.  The spike is 15-
30 cm (6-12 in) long, 1-2 cm (0.39-0.79 in) diameter and 
is stout and glabrous.  There are 4-6 spikelets per node 
with 3-5 florets.  Glumes are linear-lanceolate with a 
robust midvein and 2 faint lateral veins.  The lemma is 
lanceolate, 7-veined, softly hairy and awnless.  The palea 
is slightly shorter than the lemma.   
Chromosome number is 2n=28 (Flora of China, 2006).  
Zhipeng Liu et.al (2008) reported that Leymus racemosus 
is a tetraploid (4x). 
 
Distribution:  
Mammoth wildrye is native to China, Kazakhstan, 
Kyrgyzstan, Mongolia, Russia, Turkmenistan and 
Uzbekistan (Flora of China, 2006).  For current 

MAMMOTH WILDRYE 
Leymus racemosus (Lam.) Tzvelev 

Plant Symbol = LERA5 

 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Idaho and Washington 
Plant Materials Program 
 

Mammoth Wildrye.  Pamela Pavek, USDA-NRCS, Pullman, 
WAPMC 

 

Alternate Names 
Elymus arenarius var. giganteus, Elymus giganteus, 
Elymus racemosus, Leymus giganteus (PLANTS 
Database). 
 
Uses 
Mammoth wildrye is used primarily for stabilization of 
inland sand dunes and for wind erosion control on sand to 
fine sandy loam soils.  It is also used in wildlife plantings 
to provide cover and nesting sites for upland birds.  It can 
also be used for revegetation of mine tailings and in fire 
breaks or greenstrips.  Mammoth wildrye has also been 
used to incorporate genes from Leymus into wheat to 
improve resistance to barley yellow dwarf virus (Qi, et.al 

 

distribution in North America, consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 

Mammoth wildrye spike.  Mark Stannard, USDA-NRCS Pullman 
WAPMC 

 

Adaptation 
Mammoth wildrye is adapted to areas that receive at least 
7 inches of mean annual precipitation throughout most of 
the western United States.  It performs best on well 
drained neutral to somewhat alkaline soils.  Mammoth 
wildrye thrives in sandy soils and is very tolerant of sand 
deposition.  It can be grown on loam, silt loam and clay 
loam soils but vegetative spread by rhizomes diminishes 
on heavier soils.  It is not adapted to coastal areas.  
Mammoth wildrye tolerates fire fairly well because the 
leaves and stems remain green during the summer fire 
season and it does not combust as readily as most other 
plants (Pullman Plant Materials Center).  Stevens et.al 
(2004) indicated that mammoth wildrye is suitable for 
riparian restoration and rated tolerant of salinity and 
flooding. 
 

 
Mammoth wildrye spike top, basin wildrye spike bottom.  Mark 
Stannard, USDA-NRCS, Pullman WAPMC. 

Establishment 
Proper seedbed preparation, irrigation scheduling and 
weed management are required to establish mammoth 
wildrye.  Kochia and Russian thistle can be troublesome 
during establishment of mammoth wildrye.  Broadleaf 
herbicides effectively control both weeds.  Mowing 
mammoth wildrye is not recommended for controlling 
weeds. 
 
Use sprigs and rhizome sections to plant and stabilize 
active sand dunes.  Plant sprigs and rhizomes are planted 
only during cool weather while they are dormant and the 

site is moist to 18 inch soil depth, usually mid-November 
to mid-March. 
 
Mammoth wildrye can also be seeded.  There are 
approximately 55,000 seeds per pound (PLANTS 
database) and the recommended full seeding rate is 15 
pounds Pure Live Seed (PLS) per acre to a seeding depth 
of ½ to ¾inch (Ogle, et. al 2010).  If used as a component 
of a seeding mix, adjust to percent of mix desired.  For 
critical area stabilization or broadcast planting, double the 
drill seeding rate to 30 pounds PLS per acre.  Seeding 
should be completed in late fall as a dormant seeding on 
course textured soils. 
 
It has been determined that mammoth wildrye has 
developed an important seedling desiccation strategy to 
survive harsh conditions, most notably erosion of sand.  
Seedlings have the ability to survive and develop even 
after the whole seedling has been under desiccation for a 
long period (approximately 20-40 days), if the root is 
<15mm long prior to dehydration.  If roots are longer than 
15 mm, the seedling will not survive (Huang and 
Gutterman, 2004). 
 
Management 
Mammoth wildrye is not generally considered a forage 
plant.  The leaves and stems are very coarse, have low 
palatability, and are high in indigestible structural 
carbohydrates (Pullman Plant Materials Center), 
(Jefferson, et.al, 2004).  However, grazing animals will 
eat mammoth wildrye if no other forage is available.  Jack 
rabbits will consume new growth of mammoth wildrye 
and often pull young plants out of the ground.  Monsen 
et.al (2004) indicated that mammoth wildrye has fair 
palatability during the spring and summer.  Grazing 
should be excluded from erosion control plantings 
(Hafenrichter, et.al, 1968). 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Mammoth wildrye is susceptible to infection of ergot 
from the fungus Claviceps purpurea.  Ergot infection can 
significantly reduce seed yields and the fungal sclerotia 
contain a variety of alkaloids.  Consumption of the 
alkaloids can result in reproductive failure, gangrene and 
other serious maladies in grazing animals (Mihail, 1993). 
 
Environmental Concerns 
Mammoth wildrye spreads primarily by rhizomes and to a 
much lesser degree by seed into adjoining vegetative 
communities under ideal climatic and environmental 
conditions. 
 
For control, contact your local extension specialist or 
county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use it safely.  Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method. 
 
Plant Production 

 

 

 

Proper seedbed preparation (weed-free and firm), 
irrigation scheduling and weed management are required 
to establish mammoth wildrye.  On moving sand dunes 
and non-stabilized areas, use sprigs and rhizomes for 
stand establishment.  For maximum sprig and rhizome 
production, plants should be grown under cultivation on 
irrigated sites.  Two years are required to grow suitable 
sized sprigs and rhizomes for harvest. 
 
Handling Harvested Plant Materials 
All of the old growth, coarse roots and stems with 
seedheads are removed.  Leafy tops are cut to leave a 16 
inch stem and are tied in bundles, heeled in, or kept cool 
and moist until planting time.  Plants are dug (harvested), 
processed and planted only during cool weather while 
sprigs and rhizomes are dormant and the site to be planted 
is moist to 18 inch soil depth, usually mid-November to 
mid-March. 
 
Seed Production 
Plant mammoth wildrye seed at 8-10 pounds PLS per acre 
in 30-36 inch rows, to a seeding depth of ½ to ¾ inch.  
This seeding rate is equivalent to approximately 30 seeds 
per linear foot of row.  To facilitate seed production and 
between-row weed control, it is desirable to plant in 
spaced rows instead of a solid stand.  Cultivation is 
required to maintain rows and weed-free conditions. 
 
Seed is usually harvested in August by swathing to allow 
the seed to complete maturity followed by combining.  
Mammoth wildrye seed requires a brief after-ripening 
(one month) and stratification (1-2 weeks at 40 degrees 
F.).  Seed can be stored under cool and dry conditions for 
11-15 years without serious loss of germination or vigor 
(Jorgenson, 2004). 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
‘Volga’ was selected and released from the Pullman, 
Washington Plant Materials Center in 1949.  The original 
seed collection was made in the lower Volga region of the 
former USSR by the Westover-Enlow expedition in 1934.  
The most vigorous plants from the original collection 
were selected during several generations followed by 
vegetative reproduction for the most desirable type.  
Volga was initially released as vegetative material for 
inland dune control and in 1986 the release was modified 
to include seed propagation.  The Upper Colorado 
Environmental Plant Center at Meeker, Colorado 
produces and distributes Foundation seed (Alderson and 
Sharp, 1994). 
 

Agriculture Handbook No. 339 USDA-SCS 1979. 

 

 
References 
Alderson, J., Sharp, W.C. 1994.  Grass Varieties in the United States.  
Agriculture Handbook No. 170.  USDA-SCS.  Washington, D.C. 

Flora of China. 2006. 22:387-394. 
Hafenrichter, A.L., J.L. Schwendiman, H.L. Harris, R.S. MacLauchlan, 
H. W. Miller. 1968.  Grasses and Legumes for Soil Conservation 
in the Pacific Northwest and Great Basin States.  Agriculture 
Handbook No. 339.  USDA-SCS.  Washington, D.C. 

Huang, Z, and Y. Gutterman.  2004.  Seedling desiccation tolerance of 

Leymus racemosus (Poaceae) (wildrye), a perennial sand-dune 
grass inhabiting the Junggar Basin of Xinjian, China.  Seed 
Science Research 14:233-239. 

Jefferson, P.G., W.P. McCaughey, K. May, J. Woosaree and L. 

McFarlane. 2004.  Forage Quality of seeded native grasses in the 
fall season on the Canadian Prairie Provinces.  Can. J. Plant Sci. 
84:503-509. 

Jorgenson, K. and R. Stevens. 2004.  Seed Collection, Cleaning, and 
Storage.  USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS – GTR-
136. P. 699-716. 

Liu, Zhipeng, Z. Chen, J. Pan, X. Li, M. Su, L. Wang, Li and G. Liu. 
2008.  Phylogenetic relationships in Leymus (Poaceae: Triticeae) 
revealed by nuclear ribosomal internal transcribed spacer and 
chloroplast trnL-F sequences.  Molecular Phylogenetics and 
Evolution 46(2008) 278-289. Science Direct. 
www.sciencedirect.com 

Mihail, J.D. 1993.  Diseases of alternative crops in Missouri.  Can. J. 

Plant Pathol. 15:119-122. 

Monsen, S., R. Stevens, and N. Shaw. 2004.  Grasses. USDA Forest 

Service Gen. Tech Rep. RMRS-GTR-136. P. 199-294. 

PLANTS Database. Conservation plant characteristics for Leymus 

racemosus. [Online] Available at http://plants.usda.gov (accessed 
25 August 2010. 

Pullman Plant Material Center.  Release brochure for Volga Mammoth 

wildrye. 

Ogle, D.G., L. St. John, M. Stannard, and L. Holzworth 2010. Grass, 

Grass-like, Forb, Legume and Woody species for the 
Intermountain West.  USDA-NRCS. ID-TN24.  Boise, ID 

Qi, L.L., Wang, S.L., Chen, P.D., Liu, D.J., Friebe, B. and Gill, B.S. 

1997.  Molecular cytogenetic analysis of Leymus racemosus 
chromosomes added to wheat.  Theor Appl Genet.95:1084-1091. 

Stevens, R. and S. Monsen. 2004. Guidelines for Restoration and 

Rehabilitation of Principal Plant Communities.  USDA Forest 
Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-136. P. 309. 

 

 
 

 

 

Prepared By 
Loren St. John, Team Leader, USDA, NRCS Plant 
Materials Center, Aberdeen, ID 
 
Daniel G. Ogle, Plant Materials Specialist, USDA, NRCS, 
Boise, ID 
 
Mark Stannard, Manager, USDA, NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Pullman, WA 
 
Pamela Pavek, Agronomist, USDA, NRCS Plant 
Materials Center, Pullman, WA 
 
Citation 
St. John, L., D.G. Ogle, M. Stannard, P. Pavek. 2010. 
Plant Guide for Mammoth Wildrye (Leymus racemosus).  
USDA-Natural Resources Conservation Service, 
Aberdeen, ID Plant Materials Center. 
 
Published  October 2010 
 
Edited: ls 26Oct2010; plsp 26Oct2010; dgo01Nov10; jab02Nov2010; 
ls08Nov2010; plsp 08Nov10; dgo 08Nov10; jab 09Nov10; ms 09Nov10 
 
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District <http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site <http://Plant-
Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

