 
 

 

Plant Guide

Ethnobotanic 
Nineleaf biscuitroot was used by Blackfeet Indians for 
healing various ailments. An infusion of roots was taken 
for chest troubles, and the seed was chewed by long 
distance runners to avoid side aches (Moerman, 1993). 
The seeds were also stuffed into a porcupine’s foot and 
tied on a young girl’s hair as a good luck charm 
(Moerman, 1998). 
 
The roots of nineleaf and other biscuitroot species are 
edible and were used as an important food source by 
Native Americans. Roots could be eaten raw, cooked as a 
vegetable, or ground into flour for bread meal (USDA-FS, 
1937). 
 
Status 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State Department 
of Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General: Carrot family (Apiaceae). Nineleaf biscuitroot is 
an herbaceous forb that grows from a large taproot. 
Mature plants reach 70 cm (28 in) tall. Leaves are ternate-
pinnately compound with 9 to 21 leaflets or segments and 
petioles up to 20 cm (8 in) long (Welsh et al., 2003). The 
petiole has a dilated base which forms a sheath around the 
stem. Leaflets range from 1 to 13 cm (0.4 to 5 in) long 
and 1 to 1.5 cm (0.4 to 0.6 in) wide. The inflorescence is 
an umbel with 4 to 20 rays ending in bright yellow 
flowers. The fruit is 8 to 15 mm (0.6 in) long and 4 to 11 
mm (0.16 to 0.43 in) wide with lateral wings from 1 to 3 
mm (0.04 to 0.12 in) wide.  
 
The root is a long, narrow taproot which can extend 
several feet into the soil. Five-year old nineleaf 
biscuitroot grown at Aberdeen, Idaho had taproots of up 
to 28 cm (11 in) long and weighing up to 125 g (0.27 lb). 
The taproot makes nineleaf biscuitroot extremely tolerant 
to grazing, trampling and drought, and fire (Monsen et al., 
2004). 
 
Flowering takes place from late spring through mid-
summer with seed ripening in July and August. There are 
approximately 42,000 seeds/lb (Monsen et al., 2004). 
 

NINELEAF 

BISCUITROOT 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS Idaho Plant Materials 
Program and USDA-FS Rocky Mountain Research 
Station 
 

Lomatium triternatum (Pursh) 

Coulter & Rose 
Plant Symbol = LOTR2 

 

Nineleaf biscuitroot inflorescence.  Derek Tilley, USDA-NRCS, 
Aberdeen, ID PMC 
 
Alternate Names 
Cogswellia triternata 
Ternate lomatium 
 
Uses 
Wildlife 
Nineleaf biscuitroot begins growth very early in the 
spring, often just following snow melt, providing crucial 
early forage for many wildlife and domestic animals. It is 
considered one of the most valuable forage species of the 
genus due to its large stature and high production levels. 
It is rated as having fair to very good forage for sheep and 
poor to good forage for cattle (USDA-FS, 1937). Ogle 
and Brazee (2009) rate it as desirable spring and summer 
forage for cattle, sheep, horses, elk, deer and antelope. 
 
Early green-up and flowering make this an important 
species for early spring pollinators and other insects. It is 
highly attractive to bees.  
 
This species has been identified as an important plant 
species in sage- grouse habitat because of its early 
growth habit and the associated insects that provide a 
critical food source for sage-grouse chicks. 
 

 

 

 

 

Nineleaf biscuitroot seed. Derek Tilley, USDA-NRCS, Aberdeen, ID 
PMC 
 
Plants are known to live more than 20 years (Garden 
guides, 2010). 
 
Distribution: 
Nineleaf biscuit is native to western North America, 
occurring from northeastern California to British 
Columbia and east to Alberta and Colorado. For current 
distribution in North America, consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS website. 
 
Habitat:  
This species is common on sunny valley bottoms, open 
ridges and slopes of foothills and lower mountains. It is 
also sometimes found at higher elevations. It can be found 
in association with mountain shrub, mountain big 
sagebrush, pinyon-juniper and alpine plant communities 
at elevations from 1,300 to 2,900 m (4,200 to 9,500 ft) 
(Welsh et al., 2003). 
 
Adaptation 
Nineleaf biscuitroot is adapted to well drained, dry rocky 
soils in areas receiving 20 to 50 cm (8 to 20 in) of annual 
precipitation (Walker and Shaw, 2005). It is reported to 
grow in soils with a pH of 6.5 to 8.8 and minimum of 120 
frost free days. (Garden Guides, 2010); however, the 
authors have seen the species growing in areas with an 
average of 90 frost free days. 
 
Establishment 
The seed can be broadcast or drilled to 0.3 to 0.6 cm (1/8 
to 1/4 in) into a well prepared, weed-free seed bed. This 
species should be seeded in late fall as a dormant planting 
to allow natural stratification. Nineleaf biscuitroot does 
well in seed mixtures (Monsen et al., 2004).  
 
Management 
Once established, nineleaf biscuitroot is very competitive 
against weeds due to its long taproot; however additional 
measures to control weeds are necessary for seed 
production.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no known pests associated with nineleaf 
biscuitroot. 
 
Environmental Concerns 

There are no known environmental concerns regarding 
nineleaf biscuitroot. 
 
Plant Production 
Seed matures in July or August. Wildland seed is easily 
hand collected. The seed disarticulates readily from the 
stems, and very clean, small collections can be made by 
shaking ripened inflorescences over a bag or tarp. Minor 
screening to remove sticks provides excellent purity. Seed 
viability in proper storage conditions remains high for 3 
to 4 years (Monsen et al., 2004). 

Five year old nineleaf biscuitroot taken from a seed production field at 
Aberdeen, Idaho. Derek Tilley, USDA-NRCS, Aberdeen, ID PMC 

 

For greenhouse plant production, a long stratification 
period is required. Parkinson and DeBolt and Parkinson 
(2005) achieved over 90% germination after a 60 day 
cold/moist stratification. Skinner (2007) saw no 
germination with a non-stratified or 30 day cold/moist 
stratification treatment. Similar results were observed at 
by St. John and Ogle (2005). Best results are obtained 
when seed is sown in late fall or early winter and left 
outside to stratify naturally.  Containerized plants should 
be grown for a full season and overwintered before 
transplanting the following spring. Transplants are very 
hardy, and if weeds are controlled, 100% establishment 
can be accomplished (Skinner, 2007). 
 
 

 

Large Scale Seed Production 
Seed can be sown in rows at 82 pure live seeds (PLS)/m 
(25 PLS/ft) or into weed barrier fabric at 40 to 60 cm (18 
to 24 in) spacing. All seeding should be completed as 
dormant fall seeding to allow natural stratification to 
occur. 
 

Nineleaf biscuitroot seedlings grown in weed barrier fabric for seed 
production.  Loren St. John, USDA-NRCS, Aberdeen, ID PMC 

 

Above ground growth is slow as the plants expend energy 
developing a substantial taproot. Plants grow in early 
spring and go dormant in mid-summer, giving the 
appearance of mortality. In the first year, most plants will 
only produce a few leaves. Seed production fields at 
Aberdeen, Idaho did not produce flowers or seed until the 
fourth year of establishment. Experimental plots at 
Ontario, Oregon; using supplemental irrigation, however, 
produced seed in the second season with peak yields in 
the third and fourth years of over 1,120 kg/ha (1,000 
lb/ac) (Shock et al. 2010a). 
 
Good weed control can be achieved through the use of 
weed barrier fabric and hand rouging. Because nineleaf 
biscuitroot goes into dormancy in early summer, foliar 
herbicide applications of glyphosate to surrounding weeds 
are possible after senescense. In preliminary herbicide 
tolerance trials, seed yields were reduced by early spring 
bromoxynil applications (Shock et al., 2010b). 
 
Always read and follow label and safety instructions for 
each control method.  USDA-NRCS does not guarantee 
or warranty any products or control methods named, and 
other products may be equally effective. 
 
New techniques are being investigated regarding the 
feasibility of growing nineleaf biscuitroot in rooting beds 
at high densities prior to field establishment. This method 
would allow a grower to sacrifice a much smaller area in 
the first 1 to 2 years of plant development while the plants 
are not producing seed. 
 
Shock et al. (2010a) at Ontario, Oregon showed a positive 
response to irrigation with up to 10 cm (4 in) additional 
water. Ontario has a mean annual precipitation of 24 cm 

 

 

(9.5 in) (U.S. Climate Data, 2010), bringing the total 
water received to approximately 36 cm (14 in) for 
optimum seed production. 
 
Seed can be harvested in production fields via a vacuum 
type harvester or flail vac.  
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
Common wildland collected seed is available from 
commercial sources. There are currently no commercial 
releases of nineleaf biscuitroot. Growers are producing 
pooled sources of Source Identified germplasms for the 
Snake River Plain and Northern Great Basin Ecoregions.  
 
References 
Garden Guides. 2010. URL: 

http://www.gardenguides.com (accessed 6 December 
2010). Santa Monica, California.  

Moerman, D.E. 1998. Native American Ethnobotany. 

Timber Press. 927 p.  

Monsen, S.B., Stevens, R. and N. Shaw. 2004. Grasses. 

In: S.B. Monsen, R. Stevens, and N.L. Shaw 
[compilers]. Restoring western ranges and wildlands. 
Fort Collins, CO: USDA Forest Service, Rocky 
Mountain Research Station. General Technical 
Report RMRS-GTR-136-vol-2. p. 295-424. 

Ogle, D., and B. Brazee. 2009. Estimating initial stocking 

rates. USDA-NRCS, ID-TN 3. Boise, ID. 

Parkinson, Hilary; DeBolt, Ann. 2005. Propagation 
protocol for production of container Lomatium 
triternatum (Pursh.) Coult. & Rose. In: Native Plant 
Network. URL: http://www.nativeplantnetwork.org 
(accessed 6 December 2010). Moscow (ID): 
University of Idaho, College of Natural Resources, 
Forest Research Nursery. 

Shock, C.C., Feibert, E., Saunders, L., and N. Shaw. 

2010. Native wildflower seed production with limited 
subsurface drip irrigation. Oregon State University 
Agricultural Experiment Station, 2009 Annual 
Report: 193-209. 

Shock, C.C., J. Ishida, E.B.G. Feibert, and N. Shaw. 2010. 

Native perennial forb tolerance to repeated annual 
applications of postemergence herbicides. Oregon 
State University Agricultural Experiment Station, 
2009 Annual Report:213-217. 

Skinner, David M. 2007. Propagation protocol for 
production of container Lomatium triternatum 
(Pursh.) Coult. & Rose; In: Native Plant Network. 
URL: http://www.nativeplantnetwork.org (accessed 3 
December 2010). Moscow (ID): University of Idaho, 
College of Natural Resources, Forest Research 
Nursery. 

 

 

St. John, L. and D. Ogle. 2005. Establishment and 

maintenance of certified generation 1 (G1) seed; 
propagation of native forbs and native plant display 
nursery; develop technology to improve the diversity 
of introduced grass stands. In: Great Basin native 
plant selection and increase project USDI-BLM and 
other cooperators . 
http://www.fs.fed.us/rm/boise/research/shrub/greatba
sin.shtml (accessed 1 December 2010). Boise, Idaho.  

U.S. Climate Data. 2010. URL: 

http://www.usclimatedata.com (accessed 6 December 
2010). Summerweb. Belgium, Europe. 

USDA-FS. 1937. Range Plant Handbook. Washington, 

DC. 

USDA, NRCS. 2010. The PLANTS Database 

(http://plants.usda.gov, 7 December 2010). National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, LA 70874-4490 
USA. 

Walker, S. and N. Shaw. 2005. Current and potential use 

of broadleaf herbs for reestablishing native 
communities. USDA-FS Proceedings RMRS-P-38. 
pp. 56-61. 

Welsh, S.L., N.D. Atwood, S. Goodrich, and L.C. 

Higgins. 2003. A Utah Flora. Third Edition, revised. 
Brigham Young University, Provo, UT. 

 
Prepared By 
Derek Tilley; USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho. 
 
Loren St. John, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho. 
 
Dan Ogle, USDA NRCS State Office, Boise, Idaho. 
 
Nancy Shaw. USDA-FS. Rocky Mountain Research 
Station. Boise, Idaho. 
 

 

Citation 
Tilley, D., St. John, L. Ogle, D. and N. Shaw. 2010. Plant 
guide for nineleaf biscuitroot (Lomatium triternatum). 
USDA-Natural Resources Conservation Service, Idaho 
Plant Materials Center. Aberdeen, ID. 4 p.  

Published January 2011 

Edited: 07Dec2010dt; 07Dec2010dgo; 
07Dec2010lsj10Dec2010ns 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

