 
 

 

Plant Guide

Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General: Grass Family (Poaceae).  Manystem wildrye is 
an introduced, perennial, cool-season, sod-forming grass.  
Plants are somewhat cespitose and rhizomatous, growing 
19 to 32 inches tall (50-80 cm) (Barkworth 2009).  Stems 
are usually smooth, but are occasionally hairy.  Leaf 
blades are grayish green, sometimes glaucous, stiff and 
flat early in the growth season, becoming rolled later in 
the year, and are 0.1 to 0.3 inch wide (3-8 mm).  The 
spike is narrow and 2 to 5.5 inches long (5-14 cm), with 
typically two or more spikelets (up to 6) occurring per 
node.  Glumes and lemmas are sharp pointed, and lemmas 
are generally tipped with an awn approximately 0.1 inch 
(2-3 mm) in length.   
 
Taxonomy:  After its release, ‘Shoshone’ beardless 
wildrye (Leymus triticoides) was determined to be 
Leymus multicaulis (Asay and Jensen 1996).   L. 
multicaulis is very similar to L. triticoides; it differs 
primarily in having both primary and secondary veins in 
its blades (usually widely spaced) and small hairs on its 
calluses (about 0.2 mm long), while L. triticoides has 
closely spaced, prominently ribbed subequal veins and 
calluses without hairs, or with a few short (0.1 mm) hairs 
(Barkworth 2009).  Hybrids between the two species are 
highly fertile. 
 
Distribution: The native distribution of manystem wildrye 
in Eurasia extends from the Volga River delta to Xinjiang, 
China (Barkworth 2009).  Because of the recent 
recognition of Shoshone as manystem wildrye, its 
distribution in North America is unknown, but it is likely 
found throughout the western US.  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Adaptation 
Manystem wildrye is adapted to wet, saline meadows, 
where rainfall exceeds 9 to 14 inches (23-35 cm), or 
where wet, saline-alkaline sub-irrigated sites exist (Ogle 
et al. 2008).  Manystem wildrye does well on moderately-
coarse/sandy to poorly-drained soils, and ranges from 
uplands and slopes to bottomlands (Baldridge and 
Lohmiller 1990).   
 
This species tolerates neutral to strongly alkaline soils 
(pH 6.6 to 9.0) and soils classified as strongly saline 
(greater than 16 dS/m) (Baldridge and Lohmiller 1990; 

MANYSTEM WILDRYE 
Leymus multicaulis (Kar. & Kir.) 

 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Lockeford Plant Materials 
Center, California & Bridger Plant Materials Center, 
Montana 
 

Tzvelev 

Plant Symbol = LEMU11 

 

Leymus multicaulis, Susan R. Winslow, Bridger PMC 

Alternate Names 
Many-stem lyme grass, Elymus multicaulis 
 
Uses 
Manystem wildrye is primarily used for reclamation of 
wet, saline soils.  It can be used effectively on saline-
affected, irrigated cropland and pastureland, and on land 
where the water table is within 3 ft (0.9 m) of the soil 
surface.  Manystem wildrye is also used for reclamation 
of saline seep discharge areas on dry cropland, where 
water tables are typically deeper than 3 ft (0.9 m) and 
annual precipitation may range from 12 to 18 inches (30-
45 cm).   
 
This grass is recommended for use as forage, soil 
stabilization for prevention of wind and water erosion, 
and in wildlife cover plantings.  It is moderately palatable 
to all livestock, especially in the early spring before it 
becomes coarse.  It is compatible with creeping meadow 
foxtail (Alopecurus arundinaceus) and slender wheatgrass 
(Elymus trachycaulus)
Lohmiller 1990).   

 for cattle grazing (Baldridge and 

 

Ogle and St. John 2008).  Winter hardiness and frost 
tolerance are good, though variable among seed lots.  
Manystem wildrye is moderately shade tolerant 
(Baldridge and Lohmiller 1990).  
    
Establishment 
Fall dormant plantings are recommended for northern 
regions to increase seed coat permeability by 
overwintering in the soil (Gutormson 1984).  Mechanical 
seed scarification enhances seedling growth and improves 
establishment of spring planted manystem wildrye 
(Baldridge and Lohmiller 1990).  Seedlings have poor 
vigor, develop slowly, and compete poorly with weeds 
and other forage grasses in the first year of establishment.  
It is thus very important to minimize weed competition 
with properly prepared seedbeds and adequate weed 
management prior to seeding.   
 
For range and pasture seedings, seeds should be drilled 
into a well-disked seedbed in late fall just prior to freeze 
up at a depth of 0 to ¼ inch (6 mm) and a rate of 6 to 9 lbs 
pure live seed (PLS) per acre (7-10 kg/ha) for full-rate, 
monotypic seedings (Ogle and St. John 2008; Ogle et al. 
2008).  For restoration plantings where drilling is not 
possible, seeds can be broadcast at a rate of 10 to 20 PLS 
lbs/acre (11-22 kg/ha) (Baldridge and Lohmiller 1990).   
 
Vegetative planting of rhizomes (‘sprigging’) in mid-
September to November is recommended for 
establishment on sites typically saturated or under 
standing water in the spring or early summer, or where 
rapid cover is needed.  Stand establishment from sprigs is 
slow during the first year, but once established rhizomes 
spread rapidly to produce better coverage and more forage 
than stands originating from seed.  In Montana, sprigging 
at a rate of 40 bu/acre (100 bu/ha) is recommended for 
streambank protection plantings (Baldridge and Lohmiller 
1990).      
 
Management 
Once established, stands of manystem wildrye survive for 
many years.   Manystem wildrye has been found to be 
compatible with many other species because it does not 
form a dense, restrictive sod.  It is highly productive for 
hay when planted at a rate of 6 PLS lbs/acre (7 kg/ha) on 
irrigated or sub-irrigated sites.  Best yields are attained on 
fields with adequate levels of fertility, especially available 
nitrogen.  Forage yields depend on the level of salts and 
moisture in the soil.  High concentrations of salts and/or 
low levels of moisture result in poorer stand 
establishment, lower yields, and slower growth rates.  
Forage trials conducted on Shoshone manystem wildrye 
over a 4-year period, on fields with moderate fertility, 
yielded an average of 1,750 lbs/acre in Bridger, MT 
(Majerus 1979).     
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Manystem wildrye has been found to be susceptible to a 
soil-borne pathogen, “take-all” disease, caused by the 

 

 

100 

root-inhabiting fungus Ophiobolus graminis (Stroh 1968).  
A temporary solution to arrest the disease may be 
achieved with an application of P2O5 at a rate of 
lb/acre (112 kg/ha).  More drastic follow-up measures to 
renovate the site include plowing to a 6-inch (15-cm) 
depth, harrowing, and irrigating to promote rhizome 
emergence.  
 
Manystem wildrye varies in resistance to leaf rust, stripe 
rust, and ergot.  No ill effects are known from livestock 
consumption of the infected material.  
 
Environmental Concerns 
Manystem wildrye is known to produce fertile hybrids 
with beardless wildrye (Leymus triticoides).  Seed 
production in these species is poor so hybrid offspring 
should not have a competitive advantage in native plant 
communities.   
   

 

Shoshone foundation seed field at Bridger PMC, 2010. 

Seeds and Plant Production 
There are approximately 150,000 to 175,000 seeds per 
pound (331,000-386,000 seeds/kg) (Ogle et al. 2008).  
The recommended seeding rate for seed production under 
irrigation is 3.7 PLS lbs/acre (4.1 kg/ha) at 24-inch (60-
cm) row spacing, or 24 seeds/ft (79 seeds/m) (Smith and 
Smith 1997).  Susceptibility to seed shatter is low, but it is 
still recommended that the crop be combined from the 
windrow (Baldridge and Lohmiller 1990).  No special 
problems are presented in cleaning the seed.  
 
In Montana, Shoshone is commonly cultivated the first 
two to three years and then allowed to spread into solid 
stands.  Seed yields and stand longevity are reduced when 
between-row cultivation is not practiced.  Seed yields of 
Shoshone average 200 lbs/acre (224 kg/ha) (Baldridge 
and Lohmiller 1990).   
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
‘Shoshone’ was released in 1980 as beardless wildrye 
(Leymus triticoides) through a cooperative agreement 
between the Bridger PMC and the agricultural experiment 
stations of Montana and Wyoming.  After its release, 

however, Shoshone was determined to be the Eurasian 
species Leymus multicaulis (Asay and Jensen 1996).  The 
original collection was made in 1958 from the Riverton, 
WY fairgrounds, possibly from a seeded stand established 
in the 1940s from an unknown source.  The collection site 
is at an elevation of 4,950 ft (1,509 m), in a 5 to 9-inch 
(12-23 cm) precipitation zone in the Wind River Basin.  
Shoshone is adapted to a wide range of soil textures on 
sub-irrigated sites in most areas of Montana and 
Wyoming, as well as northwestern Colorado and southern 
Idaho.  It is a cool-season, moderately tight sod-forming 
cultivar selected primarily for forage, stabilization, or 
cover on wet or moist-saline-alkaline soils.  This includes 
pastureland, saline-affected irrigated cropland, dryland 
saline-seep-discharge areas, highly erodible areas along 
waterways, and sites that are periodically flooded.   
 
References 
Asay, K.H., and K.B. Jensen. 1996. Wildryes. p. 725-748. 
In L.E. Moser, D.R. Buxton, and M.D. Casler (eds.) 
Cool-season forage grasses. Agron. 34. Amer. Soc. of 
Agron., Madison, WI. 

Baldridge, D.E., and R.G. Lohmiller (eds.) 1990.  

Montana Interagency Plant Materials Handbook.  
Extension Bulletin 69. Montana State University 
Extension Service, Bozeman. 

Barkworth, M.E. 2009. Leymus Hochst. In Grass Manual 

on the Web [Online]. Available at 
http://herbarium.usu.edu/webmanual/info2.asp?name
=Leymus_triticoides&type=treatment (accessed 13 
Jan. 2010).  Utah State University, Logan. 
Gutormson, T.J. 1984. Field establishment and 

germination of beardless wildrye (Elymus triticoides 
Buckl.)  Thesis for Master of Science in Agronomy. 
Montana State University, Bozeman.  

Majerus, M.E. 1979. Saline seep program - Beardless 
wildrye trials. In USDA SCS Annual Technical 
Report. Bridger Plant Materials Center, Bridger, MT. 
Ogle, D., and L. St. John.  2008. Plants for saline to sodic 
soil conditions. Technical Note PM-9. USDA-NRCS, 
Boise, ID. 

Ogle, D., L. St. John, M. Stannard, and L. Holzworth.  
2008. Grass, grass-like, forb, legume, and woody 
species for the Intermountain West. Technical Note 
PM-24. USDA-NRCS, Boise, ID. 

Smith, S.R., and S. Smith (eds.) 1997. Native Grass Seed 

Production Manual. Cooperative publication of the 
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program, Ducks 
Unlimited Canada, the Manitoba Forage Seed 
Association, and the University of Manitoba. 

Stroh, J.R. 1968. Cultural methods for the establishment 
of Elymus triticoides on saline-sodic soils. In USDA-
SCS Annual Technical Report, Bridger Plant 
Materials Center, Bridger, MT. 

Prepared By 
Anna Young-Mathews 
USDA-NRCS Plant Materials Center 
Lockeford, California  
 
Susan R. Winslow 
USDA-NRCS Plant Materials Center 
Bridger, Montana 
 
Citation 
Young-Mathews, A. and S. R. Winslow. Plant guide for 
manystem wildrye (Leymus multicaulis). USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Plant Materials Center. 
Lockeford, California 95237. 

Published  October, 2010 

Edited: 17Aug2010 aym, 18Aug2010 kdl, 19Aug2010 
cjs, 20Aug2010 msk, 23Aug2010 srw, 31Aug2010 jds, 
1Sep2010 aym 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

