 
 

 

Plant Guide

taxonomists have not followed this realignment, or follow 
it hesitantly, noting that there is little difficulty in 
separating the two groups at generic level (Welsh et al 
2003).  
 
Kodachrome bladderpod was originally described as L. 
hitchcockii ssp. tumulosa by Barneby (1966). It was later 
elevated to species status by Reveal (1970), and in 1973, 
Rollins and Shaw placed L. tumulosa in L. rubicundula. 
More recently, Welsh and others have followed Al-Shbaz 
and O’Kane (2002) in placing Lesquerella in the genus 
Physaria, but have assigned Kodachrome bladderpod 
varietal status within P. rubicundula creating the new P. 
rubicundula var. tumulosa (2003).  The PLANTS 
Database (2010) currently follows Rollins (1993) and 
places L. tumulosa within L. rubicundula. Publication of 
the anticipated volume 7 of Flora North America may 
create further changes or could greatly help in settling the 
matter. This plant guide focuses primarily on L. tumulosa, 
its status as an endangered species and on management 
objectives for its recovery and protection. 
 
The previously mentioned taxonomic changes may have 
significant implications for this taxon’s status as an 
endangered species. Lesquerella rubicundula and L. 
hitchcockii are both limited to a small area in Utah and 
Nevada, but neither is as restricted in area as L. tumulosa. 
Therefore if L. tumulosa is synonomized with L. 
rubicundula or L. hitchcockii, it would likely not be 
considered to be endangered. 
 
Status 
Kodachrome bladderpod was officially listed as an 
endangered species in 1993 (USDI FWS). There is 
currently no comprehensive recovery plan created for the 
species, but a revised recovery outline is being used until 
a final recovery plan has been approved (USDI FWS 
2009).  
 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State Department 
of Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General: Mustard family (Brassicaceae or Cruciferae). 
Kodachrome bladderpod is a small, perennial mound 
forming forb reaching approximately 4 cm tall. The 
leaves are stemless, 3 to 12 mm (0.1 to 0.5 in) long and 1 
to 2 mm (0.04 to 0.08 in) wide with stellate (star-like) 
hairs. The flowers have four yellow petals from 5 to 7 mm 
(0.2 to 0.3 in) in length (Welsh et al. 2003). The fruit is an 
egg-shaped silicle (capsule) approximately 3 to 5 mm (0.1 
to 0.2 in) long containing 4 to 8 seeds. 

BREAKS BLADDERPOD 
Lesquerella rubicundula Rollins 

KODACHROME 
BLADDERPOD 

Lesquerella tumulosa (Barneby) 

OR 

Reveal 

Plant Symbol = LERU4 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Idaho Plant Materials 
Program 
 

 

Figure 1. Kodachrome bladderpod (Lesquerella tumulosa). USDI FWS 
(2010). 

 
Alternate Names 
L. hitchcockii ssp. tumulosa 
L. rubicundula 
Physaria tumulosa 
P. rubicundula var. tumulosa 
Tum bladderpod 
 
Uses 
There  are  no  known  human  or  wildlife  associated  uses 
associated with Kodachrome bladderpod. 
 
Taxonomy 
There have been numerous taxonomic changes and 
suggestions made regarding Kodachrome bladderpod 
specifically, and the genus Lesquerella as a whole. In 
2002, Lesquerella was subordinated within the genus 
Physaria by Al-Shehbaz and O’Kane (2002). Other 

 

 
According to Welsh et al. (2003) L. tumulosa differs from 
L. rubicundula in being densely pulvinate caespitose 
(very tightly mound forming) and having smaller styles, 
averaging 1.5 to 2.8 mm (0.06 to 0.11 in) versus 2.8 to 5.5 
mm (0.11 to 0.22 in) for L. rubicundula. 
 
Distribution: 
Kodachrome bladderpod is endemic to white, semibarren 
shale knolls in Kane County, Utah. There is a single 
known population of scattered occurrence in the 
Kodachrome Flats area of the Paria River drainage in 
Utah (USDI-FWS 2009). The population covers an area 
of approximately 4 km (2.5 mi) long by 1.2 km (0.75 mi) 
wide and is comprised of approximately 20,000 individual 
plants. Currently, most of the species range (90 %) is 
located within the Grand Staircase Escalante National 
Monument (GSENM) which is managed by the Bureau of 
Land Management. The remaining habitat is owned by 
Kodachrome Basin State Park and private landowners 
(USDI-FWS 2009). For current distribution, consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Habitat:  
Due to the unique environmental factors of the area, 
Kodachrome bladderpod grows with several other mound-
forming species, many endemic to the region and even 
particular geologic substrates (Welsh et al. 2003). The 
ecological site is described as a Bouteloua, (grama 
species) grassland with scattered Utah juniper; however 
the vast majority of the habitat has very little vegetative 
cover. Species found growing in association with 
Kodachrome bladderpod include antelope bitterbrush 
(Purshia tridentata), yellow cryptantha (Cryptantha 
flava), pinyon pine (Pinus edulis), Utah juniper 
(Juniperus osteosperma), and Indian ricegrass 
(Achnatherum hymenoides) (USDI-FWS 2009). 
  
Adaptation 
This narrow endemic is restricted to white, bare shale 
knolls derived from the Winsor member of the Carmel 
Formation in xeric outcrops at 1,700 m (5,700 ft) 
elevation. 
 
Establishment 
There are no known propagation protocols for 
Kodachrome bladderpod. 
 
Management 
Since the majority of the species habitat is located within 
National Monument boundaries, there is no immediate 
threat from development. However new road construction 
and off road vehicle (ORV) use are a concern. There also 
exists an active gravel quarry in Kodachrome bladderpod 
habitat. GSENM has constructed a series of fences to 
deter ORV use within some occupied areas; however 
most sites remain accessible to public ORV use. 
 

 

Cattle grazing is currently permitted within GSENM in 
Kodachrome bladderpod habitat; however, grazing occurs 
outside of the reproduction season for the species and it is 
thought that grazing impacts are minimal. 
 
Future management plans consist of monitoring of 
populations, protection from ORV use through signage, 
fencing and education, and evaluation of cattle use and 
impacts (USDI-FWS 2009). 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no known pests or potential problems 
associated with Kodachrome bladderpod. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
There are no known environmental concerns associated 
with Kodachrome bladderpod. 
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
From the little that is known regarding the reproduction of 
Kodachrome bladderpod, it appears that the species 
primarily reproduces sexually. Field observations have 
documented flowering and the presence of potential 
pollinators which may indicate at least some outcrossing. 
Flowers bloom from late April through May with seed 
dispersal in June (USDI-FWS 2009). 
 
References 
Al-Shehbaz, I.A. and S.L. O’Kane Jr. 2002. Lesquerella 
united with Physaria (Brassicaceae). Novon 12: 310-
329. 

Barneby, R.C. 1966. New sorts of Lesquerella, 

Euphorbia, and Viguiera from Kane County, Utah. 
Leafl. West. Bot. 10:313-317. 

Reveal, J.L. 1970. Comments on Lesquerella hitchcockii. 

Great Basin Naturalist 30:94-96. 

Rollins, J.L. and E.A. Shaw. 1973. The genus Lesquerella 

in North America. Harvard University Press. 
Cambridge, Massachusettes. 288p. 

USDA, NRCS. 2010. The PLANTS Database 

(http://plants.usda.gov, 16 April 2010). National 
Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, LA 70874-4490 
USA. 

USDI-Fish and Wildlife Service. 1993. Endangered and 

threatened wildlife and plants: final rule to determine 
a Utah plant Lesquerella tumulosa (Kodachrome 
bladderpod)  as an endangered species. Federal 
Register. 58 (192): 52027-52031. 

USDI-Fish and Wildlife Service. 2009. Revised recovery 
outline for the Kodachrome bladderpod (Lesquerella 
tumulosa). Utah Ecological Services Field Office. 
11p. 

Welsh, S.L., N.D. Atwood, S. Goodrich, and L.C. 

Higgins. 2003. A Utah Flora. Third Edition, revised. 
Brigham Young University, Provo, UT. 

 
 

 

 

 

Prepared By 
Derek Tilley; USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho. 
 
Loren St. John, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho. 
 
Dan Ogle, USDA NRCS State Office, Boise, Idaho. 
 
Citation 
Tilley, D., St. John, L. and D. Ogle. 2010. Plant guide for 
breaks bladderpod (Lesquerella rubicundula) or 
Kodachrome bladderpod (Lesquerella tumulosa). USDA-
Natural Resources Conservation Service, Idaho Plant 
Materials Center. Aberdeen, ID. 
 
Published: November 2010 
 
Edited: 25Aug2010djt;16Apr2010lsj; 19apr2010dgo 
 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

