 
 

 

Plant Guide

Description 
General: Grass Family (Poaceae).  Altai wildrye is an 
introduced, drought resistant, perennial grass that can 
grow to approximately 40 inches tall.  The coarse, wide, 
erect, basal leaves vary from light green to blue.  The 
plant is generally a bunch type but has short rhizomes.  
The root system can penetrate 10-13 feet deep and can use 
soil moisture to that depth more efficiently than most 
other grasses. 
 
Culms are solitary or tufted, 60-100 cm (24-40 in) tall, 
glabrous, or pubescent below nodes and the seedhead.  
Leaf sheath is grayish green, usually shorter than the 
internodes, smooth or slightly scabrous.  The ligule is 0.5-
1 mm (0.02-0.04 in) long, membranous with and an 
obtuse apex.  Leaf blade is glaucous, rolled, 15-25 cm (6-
10 in) long and 0.5-0.7 cm (0.20-0.28 in) wide, stiff and 
mostly smooth on both sides.  The spike is erect, 15-20 
cm (6-10 in) long by 0.7-1 cm (0.28-0.39 in) diameter.  
There are 2-3 spikelets per node with 2 or 3 florets per 
spikelet.  Glumes cover the base of the first lemma, 10-13 
mm (0.39-0.51 in) long, linear-lanceolate and 1-veined.  
Lemma is lanceolate, with 5-7 faint veins.  The first 
lemma is 10-14 mm (0.39-0.55 in) long including an awn.  
The palea is slightly shorter than the lemma and is ciliate 
along the keels (Flora of China).  The seed is very large, 
three times the size of Russian wildrye (Kruger). 
 
Distribution: 
Altai wildrye is native to China, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, 
Mongolia, Russia, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, southwest 
Asia and Europe (Flora of China).  For current 
distribution in North America, consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Adaptation 
Altai wildrye is well adapted to loam to clay-loam soils 
receiving 14-18 inches or greater mean annual 
precipitation (or irrigated).  It has comparable seedling 
emergence and tolerance to salinity as Russian wildrye 
(Kruger), (McElgunn and Lawrence, 1973) and can be 
utilized to reclaim saline sites. 
 
 
Establishment 
Altai wildrye seedlings grow and establish slowly and as 
compared to many other grasses and are poor competitors 
with weeds.  Good seedbed preparation is critical to stand 
establishment.  It is important to have a clean, firm 
seedbed.  Weeds should be destroyed by cultivation or 
with herbicides before seeding.  After emergence, weed 
control will need to continue to ensure plant 
establishment.  Once Altai wildrye is established, it is 
very competitive with most weeds (Smoliak, et. al, 1990). 

ALTAI WILDRYE 

Leymus angustus (Trin.) Pilg. 

Plant Symbol = LEAN3 

 
Contributed by USDA NRCS Idaho and North Dakota 
Plant Materials Program 

'Prairieland’ Altai wildrye.  Loren St. John, USDA-NRCS, 
Aberdeen, ID PMC. 

 

Alternate Names 
Aneurolepidium angustum (Trin.) Nevski, Elymus 
angustus Trin. (PLANTS Database). 
 
Uses 
Grazing: Altai wildrye is well suited for pasture forage 
production.  It has a long period of growth that begins 
early in the spring and continues into late fall.  The mostly 
basal leaves make the forage difficult to harvest as hay 
(Smoliak, et. al, 1990). 
 
Wildlife: Altai wildrye provides good wildlife cover 
because of its tall stature and standing residue but is not 
readily used by foraging wildlife.  It has limited value as a 
seed source for wildlife and birds or use by native 
pollinators (Sedivec, et. al, 2007). 
 
Status 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State Department 
of Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values). 

 

Even though seed of Altai wildrye is large and can 
emerge better from deeper depths than many other 
grasses, shallow seeding is recommended because of its 
reduced competitive ability (Smoliak, et. al, 1990), 
(Kruger).  Altai wildrye should be seeded with a drill at a 
depth of ¼-½ inch.  There are approximately 68,000 seeds 
per pound (PLANTS Database).  The recommended full 
seeding rate is 12 pounds Pure Live Seed (PLS) per acre 
(Ogle, et. al, 2010).  If used as a component of a seeding 
mix, adjust to percent of mix desired.  For critical area 
stabilization or broadcast planting, double the drill 
seeding rate to 24 pounds PLS per acre. 
 
Management 
New stands of Altai wildrye should not be grazed until 
they are well established and have started to produce seed 
heads.  Eight inches of new growth should be attained in 
spring before grazing is allowed in established stands.  
Grazing cycles with 35 days or more rest are 
recommended.  Six inches of stubble should remain at the 
end of the grazing season to maintain the long-term health 
of the stand (Ogle, et al., 2009). 
 
Altai wildrye establishes slowly as compared to many 
other grasses and is a poor competitor with weeds.  
However, once established, it is a very competitive grass.  
Altai wildrye produces about 20 percent of its total 
growth by mid-May and 30 percent by early June and 
reaches peak forage production by late July.  It provides 
good quality forage in spring and early summer based on 
its growth patterns.  It also provides excellent quality 
forage in the fall and early winter (Sedivec, et al, 2007).  
In northern regions, it is commonly swathed into 
windrows and utilized for winter forage (Ogle, et al., 
2010). 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Altai wildrye is susceptible to leaf spot diseases.  
Resistance to leaf spot has been a factor in the selection of 
released varieties (Sedivec, et al. 2007). 
 
Environmental Concerns 
Altai wildrye is a bunchgrass that develops short 
rhizomes.  It generally does not move from its planting 
location except under ideal climatic and environmental 
conditions.  
 
Seed Production 
Plant Altai wildrye seed at 6-7 pounds PLS per acre in 30-
36 inch rows to a seeding depth of ¼ to½ inch in a clean, 
firm seedbed.  This seeding rate is equivalent to 
approximately 30 seeds per linear foot of row.  Seeding in 
April and May is recommended to maximize stand 
establishment and seed yield (Kruger).  To facilitate seed 
production and weed control, it is desirable to plant in 
spaced rows instead of a solid stand.  Between-row 
cultivation is required to maximize seed yield, and to 
maintain rows and weed-free conditions. 
 

 

 

Altai wildrye seed production field in North Dakota.  USDA-NRCS, 
Bismarck, ND PMC. 

 

Fertilizer is generally not recommended during 
establishment.  If soil nitrogen and phosphorus are low, 
an application of 10-15 pounds per acre of nitrogen and 
20-30 pounds per acre of phosphorus may be applied and 
incorporated into the soil prior to planting.  Fertilize for 
full seed production following the establishment year in 
the early fall or if on sandy soils, use split applications in 
early fall and again in early spring. 
 
Clipping or mowing annual weeds is an effective strategy 
for control during the establishment year.  Weeds should 
be mowed as needed to prevent them from setting seed.  
Once Altai wildrye becomes established, there will be 
fewer weeds.  Hand rouging and herbicides labeled for 
grass seed production will also be required.  The most 
difficult weeds to control include quackgrass, cheatgrass 
(downy brome), green foxtail and Persian darnel.  
(Kruger). 
 
Seed is usually harvested mid to late July.  Swathing to 
allow the seed to complete maturity followed by 
combining is recommended.  Direct combining is also an 
option but harvest timing and seed drying are critical 
elements that must be dealt with.  Altai wildrye readily 
shatters when mature and seed must be dried to 10-12 
percent moisture content before storage (Kruger).  Seed 
yields range from 50 to 150 pounds per acre on dryland 
and 75 to 200 pounds per acre under irrigation.  The 
removal of residue and stubble from seed production 
fields is critical to maintaining the seed productivity of a 
stand.  Plots remaining unclipped in the fall show 
elevation of the growing points above the ground level 
predisposing primordial seed heads to winter injury 
(Kruger). 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
 
‘Eejay’ was selected and released by Agriculture Canada 
(Swift Current, Saskatchewan) in 1989.  It was selected 
for higher seed and forage yield compared to Prairieland 
and is also resistant to leaf spot diseases (Sedivec, et al. 
2007). 
 

‘Mustang’ was released in 2004 by the USDA-
Agricultural Research Service, Forage and Range 
Laboratory in Logan, Utah.  It is significantly taller than 
Prairieland, Pearl and Eejay.  It has higher forage 
production than Prairieland or Pearl and superior seedling 
establishment compared to Prairieland and Pearl (Sedivec, 
et al. 2007). 
 
‘Pearl’ was selected and released by Agriculture Canada 
(Swift Current, Saskatchewan) in 1989.  It was selected 
for higher seed production than Prairieland.  It has lower 
forage yield than Prairieland and is also resistant to leaf 
spot diseases (Sedivec, et al. 2007). 
 
‘Prairieland’ was selected and released by Agriculture 
Canada (Swift Current, Saskatchewan) in 1976.  It was 
selected for high seed yield, high forage yield and is 
resistant to leaf spot diseases (Sedivec, et al. 2007). 
 
References 
Flora of China.  Leymus angustus.  [Online] Available at 
http://www.efloras.org (accessed 26 October 2010). 

Kruger G., no date.  Altai wildrye: A Seed Production 

Review.  [Online] Available at www1.agric.gov.ab.ca 
(accessed 27 October 2010). 

McElgunn, J. D. and Lawrence, T. 1973.  Salinity 

Tolerance of Altai Wild Ryegrass and Other Forage 
Grasses.  Can. J. Plant Sci. 53: 303-307. 

Ogle, D.G., St. John, L., Stannard, M. 2010.  Grass, 

Grass-like, Forb, Legume and Woody species for the 
Intermountain West.  USDA-NRCS.  ID-TN24.  
Boise, ID. 

Ogle, D.G.., St. John, L., Cornwell, J., Stannard, M. and 
Holzworth, L. 2009.  Pasture and Range Seedings: 
Planning – Installation – Evaluation – Management.  
USDA-NRCS.  ID-TN10.  Boise, ID. 

Ogle, D.G., St. John, L., and Stannard, M. 2009.  Pasture 

– Species Selection and Grazing Management 
Guidelines.  USDA-NRCS.  ID-TN11.  Boise, ID 

PLANTS Database. Conservation plant characteristics for 

Leymus angustus.  [Online] Available at 
http://plants.usda.gov (accessed 26 October 2010). 

Sedivec, K. K., Tober, D.A., Duckwitz, W.L., Dewald, D. 

D., and Printz, J. L. 2007.  Grasses for the Northern 
Plains. Volume 1 – Cool Season.  North Dakota State 
University Extension Service R-1323. 89 p. 

Smoliak, S., Ditterline, R.L., Scheetz, J.D., Holzworth, L. 

K., Sims, J.R., Wiesner, D.E., Baldrige, D.E. and 
Tibke, G.L. 1990.  Montana Interagency Plant 
Materials Handbook for Forage Production, 
Conservation, Reclamation and Wildlife.  Montana 
State University, Extension Service. EB 69. 337 p. 

Prepared By 
Loren St. John, Team Leader, USDA, NRCS Plant 
Materials Center, Aberdeen, ID 
 
Daniel G. Ogle, Plant Materials Specialist, USDA, NRCS, 
Boise, ID 
 
Wayne Duckwitz, Manager, USDA, Plant Materials 
Center, Bismarck, ND 
 
Dwight Tober, Plant Materials Specialist, USDA, NRCS, 
Bismarck, ND 
 
Citation 
St. John, L., D.G. Ogle, W. Duckwitz, D. Tober. 2010.  
Plant Guide for Altai wildrye (Leymus angustus).  USDA-
Natural Resources Conservation Service, Aberdeen, ID 
Plant Materials Center 

Published January, 2011 

Edited: ls 19Nov2010;dgo 14Dec2010;wd13Dec2010;ls 
14 Dec2010;wd17Dec2010; jab 20Dec2010; ls 5jan2011 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

