 
 

 

Plant Guide

Lupinus polyphyllus Lindl. var. prunophilus (M.E. 
Jones) L. Phillips,  
Lupinus polyphyllus Lindl. var. saxosus (Howell) 
Barneby, 
Lupinus prunophilus M.E. Jones, 
Lupinus pseudopolyphyllus C.P. Sm., 
Lupinus stationis C.P. Sm., 
Lupinus wyethii S. Wats. var. prunophilus (M.E. 
Jones) C.P. Sm. 

Uses 
Pollinator habitat: Bigleaf lupine attracts native bees, 
bumble bees, and other beneficial insects with its nectar 
and pollen-rich flowers that bloom from mid-spring into 
mid-summer (Ley et al., 2007).  It also attracts 
hummingbirds, contributing to the biodiversity of any 
site. 
Ornamental: Also commonly known as garden lupine, its 
pleasant fragrance and tall, showy flowers make the plant 
a favorite ornamental for gardeners across the country.  
Take care to manage the lupines properly as some 
ornamental hybrids can become weedy and problematic. 
Restoration: Plants may be used for prairie or wetland 
restoration as an important component of the native flora.  
They are deep rooted and suitable for erosion control and 
soil stabilization.  Also, as a native legume, they can be 
used in revegetation of logging roads or clear cuts as 
nitrogen fixers (Pojar and MacKinnon, 1994). 

Ethnobotany 
Tribes throughout the range of bigleaf lupine reportedly 
used different parts of the plant for medicinal or tonic 
purposes (Moerman, 2003).  Although the Thompson 
tribes of British Columbia considered it poisonous, they 
used it medicinally for themselves and their horses.  The 
Salishan used it to make tonics and the Kwakiutl ate the 
roots, fresh or steamed.  The Kashaya Pomo used its 
flowers ceremoniously in dances and festivals.   

Status 
Throughout its native range in the western U.S., bigleaf 
lupine has a facultative (FAC) indicator status, meaning it 
is just as likely to occur in wetlands as uplands (USFWS, 
2012).  Where it has become invasive in the Midwest, 
North Central and Northeastern regions, it is considered a 
facultative upland species (FACU), meaning it 
occasionally occurs in wetlands but is usually found in 
uplands.  In the Great Plains, however, it has a facultative 
wetland (FACW) status, meaning it is usually found in 
wetlands, but occasionally occurs in uplands.  Please 
consult the PLANTS Web site and your State Department 
of Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., 

BIGLEAF LUPINE 
Lupinus polyphyllus Lindl. 

Plant Symbol = LUPO2 

Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials 
Center, Oregon  

Photo by Amy Bartow, NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials Center, 2010 

 

Alternate Names 
Alternate Common Names:  large leaf lupine, large-leaved 
lupine, Washington lupine, garden lupine, marsh lupine, 
blue-pod lupine, altramuz perenne 
Alternate Scientific Names:  Due to its large geographic 
range, adaptability, and tendency to hybridize, there are 
several different forms of this species that have been 
variously treated by botanists as subspecies, varieties, or 
taxonomic synonyms, including the following:  

Lupinus arcticus S. Wats. var. prunophilus (M.E. 
Jones) C.P. Sm., 
Lupinus burkei S. Wats. ssp. burkei,  
Lupinus garfieldensis C.P. Sm., 
Lupinus matanuskensis C.P. Sm., 
Lupinus polyphyllus Lindl. ssp. bernardinus (Abrams 
ex C. P. Sm.) Munz,  
Lupinus polyphyllus Lindl. ssp. polyphyllus,  
Lupinus polyphyllus Lindl. ssp. superbus (A. Heller) 
Munz,  
Lupinus polyphyllus Lindl. var. albiflorus Lindl.,  
Lupinus polyphyllus Lindl. var. burkei (S. Watson) C. 
L. Hitchc.,  
Lupinus polyphyllus Lindl. var. humicola (A. Nelson) 
Barneby,  
Lupinus polyphyllus Lindl. var. grandifolius (Lindl. 
ex J. Agardh) Torr. & A. Gray,  
Lupinus polyphyllus Lindl. var. pallidipes (A. Heller) 
C. P. Sm.,  
Lupinus polyphyllus Lindl. var. polyphyllus,  

 

threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values). 

Weediness 
Lupinus polyphyllus ssp. polyphyllus has been reported as 
problematic in the eastern portion of North America 
(Martin and Hawley, 2012).  This “garden lupine” or 
“Russell hybrid” is an escaped hybrid ornamental and 
may become weedy or invasive in some regions or 
habitats, displacing desirable vegetation if not properly 
managed.  Please consult with your local NRCS Field 
Office, Cooperative Extension Service office, state natural 
resource, or state agriculture department regarding its 
status and use.  Weed information is also available from 
the PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/.  Please 
consult the Related Web Sites on the Plant Profile for this 
species for further information. 

Description 
General:  This native perennial forb is a legume with a 
highly variable growth habit.  Some varieties grow a large 
crown and can reach 5 feet tall, while others are highly 
rhizomatous, branching out many feet, but growing only 6 
inches to a few feet tall.  Its hollow stalks and large 
palmate leaves may be hairy to smooth, and at maturity 
produce 3-inch to 1.5-ft tall racemes of showy white-pink 
to purplish-blue flowers (Sholars, 2012).  Flowering 
typically occurs from May through July or August, with 
the hairy pods ripening somewhat unevenly, turning a 
light grayish tan to dark brown.  Pods will produce 3 to 9 
small (approximately ¼ inch in length), bean-shaped, 
mottled brown seeds.  Plants are long-lived, usually 
lasting three years, and possibly much longer. 
Distribution:  Bigleaf lupine is native to western North 
America, from British Columbia and Alberta south to 
California and east to Montana, Idaho and Nevada.  In the 
East, subspecies polyphyllus is considered invasive and 
has spread across the Great Lakes states, into the 
northeastern coastal states, and eastern Canada.  The 
species is also found in Alaska, but is believed to have 
also been introduced there.  For current distribution, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species on 
the PLANTS Web site. 
Habitat:  This species prefers moist habitats and 
seasonally wet soils, but will tolerate seasonal dryness 
(Robson et al., 2008).  It is commonly found in a variety 
of habitat types including seasonally dry to marshy 
meadows, wetlands and damp forests, along stream banks 
and ditches, and in disturbed areas (Turner and Gustafson, 
2006).  

Adaptation 
Although bigleaf lupine prefers cool, subalpine climates 
and damp to wet soils, it can also tolerate full sun and 
seasonally drier soils (Robson et al., 2008).  Observations 
indicate it can even prefer acidic, nutrient-poor mineral 
soils, giving it a competitive advantage over other plants 
in the community (Fremstad, 2010).  This is a very 

 

 

 Photo courtesy of G. D. Carr, Oregon Flora Project, 2006 

versatile plant that will grow almost anywhere with few 
management needs. 

Establishment 
Prior to planting, reduction of the weed seed bank on site 
and proper field preparation is important.  Bigleaf lupine, 
like many legumes, has hard-coated seeds, so will 
germinate unevenly if not scarified prior to sowing.  
Scarified seeds or plugs should be started in moist to wet 
soils.  Fortunately because of its rapid spring growth, this 
species can be quite competitive with weeds if established 
from transplants in early spring.  Scarified seeds can also 
be sown in fall or spring, but competition with weeds may 
limit establishment success.  For broadcast seeding, the 
recommended single-species rate ranges from 10 to 35 
lb/acre, depending on use and site conditions.  There are 
approximately 19-30,000 seeds per pound, so sowing at a 
rate of 10 pure live seed (PLS) pounds per acre will result 
in 4 to 7 seeds per square foot.  Establishment and 
subsequent growth may also be improved by inoculating 
with nitrogen-fixing bacteria (Rhizobium lupini) prior to 
planting to aid the formation of root nodules.  Plants are 
hearty and will grow throughout the first year, reaching 
maturity and flowering the second year.   

Management 

Planting in late fall, near a water source, or with irrigation 
is ideal for emerging L. polyphyllus seedlings.  As they 
mature, however, the established plants are often very 
prolific and hearty and will not necessarily require 
irrigation throughout the dry season. 

Pests and Potential Problems 
Aphids and powdery mildew are known to be problematic 
for this species.  High rates of infestation can weaken 
plants, and can lower seed yields if in production. 

Environmental Concerns 
Seeds may be toxic to ruminant livestock or wildlife if 
consumed in large quantities (Forero et al., 2011).  Many 
lupines hybridize with other species of lupines.  If the 
plants are in seed production or it is necessary to keep 
species purity, be sure to isolate different species and 
populations by at least 1000 ft.   

Control 
Introduced L. polyphyllus hybrids are highly adaptable 
and can become weedy and cause problems for areas 
outside of their native range.  An application of 
glyphosate, where applicable or indicated, has been 
effective in diminishing localized populations; 
alternatively, a frequent mowing or deadheading before 
flowering or before seed pods ripen will help prevent 
further spread (Fremstad, 2010).  Please contact your 
local agricultural extension specialist or county weed 
specialist to learn what works best in your area and how 
to use it safely.  Always read label and safety instructions 
for each control method.   

Seeds and Plant Production 
Planting: Bigleaf lupine can be hard-seeded, so physical 
or chemical scarification can improve uniformity of 
germination.  The preferred planting method for seed 
production fields of this species is to plant plugs on wide 
row spacing (24–36 inches) to accommodate plant size 
and weed management strategies.  Direct seeding is not 
recommended because weeds can out-compete seedlings 
in the spring.  However, if direct sowing is desired, sow in 
the spring in 16- to 30-inch wide rows, at 10–12 lb per 
acre, and at a depth of ½ to ¾ inch.  Wider spacing allows 
for initial tillage or herbicide application between rows.  
An application of a balanced fertilizer (15-15-15) 
following planting may aid establishment.   There are no 
herbicides labeled for use on lupines when grown for 
seed.  Hand hoeing, herbicide spot treatments, and row 
tillage are some weed management options.  
Harvest: These plants usually do not flower their first 
growing season.  After blooming the second year, the 
pods are ripe when they turn a light tan to dark brown 
color and feel very dry.  Stalks of pods can be hand 
harvested as they mature, or directly combined if maturity 
across the field is uniform.  Combined materials should be 
laid out in a warm, dry place to cure before cleaning.  
Seeds can be expelled many feet from the pods, so cover 
material with a netted fabric (such as shadecloth or 

 

 

remay) as it is drying. Combining during harvest takes 
much of the bulk plant material off the field, but plants 
may benefit from an additional mowing (no lower than 
4”) before winter. Plants are mostly dormant in late 
summer and throughout the winter.  New leaves begin to 
emerge from the crown in early spring.  
Seed cleaning: A combine or stationary thresher will 
break open the seed pods, and seeds can then be separated 
from plant materials or other organic matter using an air-
screen machine.  Seeds are large, easily identifiable, and 
readily separated from other materials.  In Corvallis, OR, 
annual yields average 200 to 300 pounds per acre , 
depending on harvest methods employed.  A typical stand 
can be productive for upwards of three years. 

Photo by Robert C. Hoffman, NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials Center, 
2012. 

 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
There are a number of horticultural cultivars available 
commercially that are sometimes called bigleaf lupines 
but are actually crosses of L. polyphyllus with L. arboreus 
and possibly L. nootkatensis.  These Russell Hybrids 
(named for British horticulturist George Russell) are sold 
under hybrid names such as Rainbow Lupins, Lupin Tutti 
Fruitti, and Band of Nobles (mixed), Chandelier (yellow), 
My Castle (red), Noble Maiden (white), The Chatelaine 
(pink), and The Governor (blue). Container plants or seed 
of native varieties are generally available from 
commercial native plant growers in the West. 

References 
Forero, L., G. Nader, A. Craigmill, J.M. Ditomaso, B. 
Puschner, and J. Maas. 2011. Livestock-poisoning 
plants of California. Publication 8398. Agriculture 
and Natural Resources, Univ. of California. 
http://anrcatalog.ucdavis.edu/pdf/8398.pdf (accessed 
12 Dec 2012).  

Lupinus polyphyllus. – From: Online Database of the 
European Network on Invasive Alien Species – 
NOBANIS www.nobanis.org (accessed 12 Dec 
2012). 

Ley, E.L., S. Buchmann, K. McGuire, and R. Holmes. 
2007. Selecting plants for pollinators: a regional 
guide for farmers, land managers, and gardeners in 
the Pacific Lowland Mixed Forest Province. 
Pollinator Partnership and the North American 
Pollinator Protection Campaign, San Francisco. 
http://pollinator.org/PDFs/Guides/PacificLowlandrx9
FINAL.pdf (accessed 24 Aug. 2012).  

Martin, R., and R. Hawley. 2012. Lupinus polyphyllus 

invasive to Maine. Gulf of Maine Research Institute. 
http://vitalsignsme.org/sites/default/files/content/ui_l
upinus_polyphyllus_090412.pdf (accessed 24 Aug. 
2012). 

Fremstad, E. 2010. Invasive alien species fact sheet – 

Moerman, D., editor. 2003. Native American ethnobotany 

database. Univ. of Michigan, Dearborn.  
http://herb.umd.umich.edu/ (accessed 24 Aug. 2012). 
Pojar, J., and A. MacKinnon, editors. 1994.  Plants of the 

Pacific Northwest Coast: Washington, Oregon, 
British Columbia & Alaska. Lone Pine   Publishing, 
Vancouver. 

Robson, K.A., A. Richter, and M. Filbert. 2008. 

Encyclopedia of Northwest native plants for gardens 
and landscapes. Timber Press, Inc., Portland. 

Sholars, T. 2012. Lupinus. In: J.C. Hickman, ed., The  
Jepson manual of higher plants of California, Univ. 
of California. http://ucjeps.berkeley.edu/cgi-
bin/get_IJM.pl?tid=32018 (accessed 12 Dec 2012). 

 

Turner, M., and P. Gustafson. 2006. Wildflowers of the 

Pacific Northwest. Timber Press, Portland. 

USFWS (United States Fish and Wildlife Service). 2012. 

2012 National wetland plant list. In: The PLANTS 
database, USDA-NRCS, National Plant Data Center. 
http://plants.usda.gov/wetland.html (accessed 09 
Sept. 2012). 

Photo Credit: 
Carr, G.D. Lupinus polyphyllus. Oregon Flora Project. 

www.oregonflora.org (accessed 30 Aug. 2012). 

Prepared By:  Mary Beuthin, USDA NRCS Corvallis 
Plant Materials Center, Oregon 

Citation 
Beuthin, M. 2012. Plant guide for bigleaf lupine (Lupinus 
polyphyllus). USDA-Natural Resources Conservation 
Service, Plant Materials Center, Corvallis, OR. 

Published October 2012 
Edited: 13Dec2012 aym; 16Jan2013 jab  

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

