 
 

 

Plant Guide

 
Description 
General: Mustard family (Brassicaceae). Barneby 
ridge-cress is a pulvinate-caespitose (mound forming) 
perennial forb arising from a thickened branched  
woody taproot. The plants grow 7 to 12 cm (3 to 5 in) 
tall and forms clumps or cushions up to 20 cm (8 in) 
across. The stems are smooth or minutely hairy. The 
leaves are narrow, 1 to 6.5 cm (0.4 to 2.5 in) long and 
1 to 3 mm (0.04 to 0.12 in) wide. The flowers are 
small, four-petaled, with white petals 3.5 to 4 mm 
(0.14 to 0.16 in) long. The fruit is a silicle (an oval 
pod), 3 to 6 mm (0.12 to 0.24 in) long and 3 to 4 mm 
(0.12 0.16 in) wide (Welsh et al., 2003). 
 
Distribution:   
Barneby ridge-cress is endemic to Indian Canyon 
Drainage in Duchesne County, Utah approximately 5 
km (3 mi) south of Starvation Reservoir. The single 
population contains approximately 5,000 individuals 
and covers nearly 500 acres (CPC, 2011). All known 
stands exist on the Ouray Reservation of the Ute 
Indian Tribe (USDI-FWS, 1993). 
 
For current distribution, consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Habitat:  
Barneby ridge-cress grows on a series of marly shale 
barrens on three ridgelines on either side of Indian 
Creek. The habitat for Barneby ridge-cress occurs in 
pockets in pinyon-juniper woodlands. Barneby ridge-
cress grows in close association with other mound 
forming species including stemless woolybase 
(Hymenoxys acaulis), plateau Townsendia 
(Townsendia mensana), Hooker’s sandwort 
(Arenaria hookeri), and low feverfew (Parthenium 
ligulatum). 
 
Adaptation 
Barneby ridge-cress is endemic to marly shale 
barrens derived from the Uinta and Green River 
Formations in a 10 to 14 inch precipitation area. 
These shale barrens form pockets or islands of 
suitable habitat surrounded by unsuitable soils 
(USDI-FWS, 1993). 
 
Management 
Threats to Barneby ridge-cress include off-road 
vehicle damage and oil and gas development. The 
entire population is currently located in an 
established oil and gas field (USDI-FWS, 1993). 
Short term management objectives include 

 

BARNEBY RIDGE-

CRESS 

Lepidium barnebyanum Reveal 

Plant Symbol = LEBA 

Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Idaho and Utah Plant 
Materials Program 

Barneby ridge-cress (Lepidium barnebyanum). Photo by Ben 
Franklin, Courtesy of Utah DNR 

Alternate Names 
Lepidium montanum ssp. demissum Hitchcock 
Barneby pepper cress 
Ridgecress 
 
Uses 
There are no known human uses of Barneby ridge-
cress. 

Status 
Barneby ridge-cress was listed as an endangered 
species by the USDI Fish and Wildlife Service in 
1990 (USDI-FWS, 1990). It is restricted to a single 
population in Duchesne County, Utah comprised of 
three disjunct stands. It is considered a species with a 
high degree of threat and a low recovery potential for 
which there are conflicts with economic activities 
(USDI-FWS, 1993). 
 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

 
 
 

 

preventing extinction and continued habitat 
degradation by maintaining and protecting the 
existing population. Long term goals include 
conducting inventories of suitable habitat to better 
determine the species distribution, and establishing 
new stands if suitable habitat is located (USDI-FWS, 
1993). 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no known pests associated with Barneby 
ridge-cress. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
There are no known environmental concerns 
associated with Barneby ridge-cress. 
 
Seed and Plant Production 
Reproduction of Barneby ridge-cress is sexual. The 
flowers bloom in April and May and fruiting occurs 
in late May through June. Pollinators are unknown.  
 
References 
Center for Plant Conservation. 2011. Plant profile for 

Lepidium barnebyanum. Online at: 
http://www.centerforplantconservation.org. 
Accessed January 7, 2011. 

USDI-Fish and Wildlife Service. 1990. Endangered 
and threatened wildlife and plants; endangered 
status for the plant Lepidium barnebyanum 
(Barneby ridge-cress). In: Federal Register 
55(189): 39860-39864. 

USDI-Fish and Wildlife Service. 1993. Barneby 

ridge-cress (Lepidium barnebyanum) recovery 
plan. U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Denver, 
Colorado. 14 pp. 

 

Welsh, S.L., N.D. Atwood, S. Goodrich, and L.C. 
Higgins. 2003. A Utah Flora. Third Edition, 
revised. Brigham Young University, Provo, UT. 

 
Prepared By: 
Derek Tilley; USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho. 
 
Loren St. John, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho. 
 
Dan Ogle, USDA NRCS, Boise, Idaho. 

Citation 
Tilley, D., L. St. John and D. Ogle. 2010. Plant guide 
for Barneby ridge-cress (Lepidium barnebyanum). 
USDA-Natural Resources Conservation Service, 
Idaho Plant Materials Center. Aberdeen, ID. 

Published Jan 2011 
Edited: 07Jan2011 djt, 07jan2011dgo; 07Jan2011lsj  

For more information about this and other plants, 
please contact your local NRCS field office or 
Conservation District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ 
and visit the PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant Materials Program 
Web site http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or 
availability of other Web sites. 

 
 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

