 
 

 

Plant Guide

basketmakers.  The South Carolina gulfhairawn muhly 
populations have been seriously impacted by urbanization 
and remaining populations are located in areas that have 
no or extremely limited access.  Currently, the basket-
makers are purchasing the majority of their sweet-grass 
leaves out of other geographic areas, such as Florida.  
Establishment of sweetgrass populations in publicly 
accessible areas to provide a source of basketry material 
has been recognized as a major cultural need in the 
coastal South Carolina area. 
 
Ornamental: Gulfhairawn muhly is especially well suited 
for planting in landscape areas that receive minimal 
maintenance and is generally marketed by the nursery 
trade in the southeastern U.S. under the common name 
purple muhly. 
 
Erosion Control: This species is an important component 
of the coastal ecological community.  Its root system 
provides structural stability to the soils. 
 
Wildlife Use: There are no documented instances of 
wildlife using gulfhairawn muhly for food.  However, it 
provides cover, nesting sites, and travel corridors for song 
birds, water fowl, and small mammals. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General: Gulfhairawn muhly is a clump-forming, 
perennial, warm-season grass that does not have 
rhizomes.  The erect culms of this grass are usually 2- to 
5-feet tall and are mostly unbranched; culms are generally 
glabrous, but may be minutely pubescent at the internodes 
and at the sheath.  Leaf blades are 13- to 39-inches long 
and 1- to 3-cm wide, usually involute (rolled inwards), 
dark green in color, and smooth on the upper surface and 
rough on the lower.  The elongated panicles are 7- to 24-
inches long and diffuse or open, with fine branches.  
Spikelets are 3- to 5-mm long and purplish in color.  The 
glumes of the spikelet are 1- to 2-mm long.  Both glumes 
are awned; the awns of the lower glume are 0.5- to 10-
mm long and those of the upper glume are 2 to 25 mm in 
length.  Lemmas are 3- to 5-mm long, lanceolate in shape, 
and have an awn that ranges from 8 to 35 mm in length.  
Each lemma has two delicate setaceous (hair-like) teeth, 
one on either side of the awn, that are 1- to 5-mm long.  
Paleas are 2- to 4.5-mm long, also lanceolate, and are 
generally awned (up to 2 mm long).  Caryopses are 
brownish and 2 to 2.5 mm in length. 

GULFHAIRAWN 

MUHLY 
Muhlenbergia filipes

 M.A. 

Curtis 

Plant Symbol = MUFI3 

 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Brooksville Plant Materials 
Center 
 

 

Tommy Socha, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Charleston 
District 
 
Alternate Names 
Sweetgrass, purple muhly, Muhlenbergia capillaris 
(Lam.) Trin. var. filipes (M.A.Curtis) Chapm. ex Beal, 
Muhlenbergia sericea (Michx.) P.M. Peterson 
 
Uses 
Ethnobotanic: The leaves of this grass are used by the 
Gullah community, descendants of enslaved Africans in 
the South Carolina coastal area, as the base material for 
their coiled basketry.  The Gullah is a recognized cultural 
group with distinctive sociological traditions.  The craft of 
making these baskets came from the slave’s African 
homelands and has been passed down through the 
generations.  The raw materials used were harvested 
locally and include the leaves of this grass, which they 
named sweetgrass, longleaf pine (Pinus palustris Mill.) 
needles, and needlegrass or black rush (Juncus 
roemerianus Scheele) stems.  Clusters of these base 
materials were sewn together with narrow strips cut from 
the leaves of saw palmetto [Sabal palmetto (Walter) 
Lodd. ex Schult. & Schult. f.) plants.  The original 
purpose of these baskets was entirely functional, mainly 
to carry out rice production activities; however, they are 
now recognized as an artform and their marketing 
provides a major source of income for the Gullah 
 

 
Muhlenbergia. capillaris (Lam.) Trin. is widely sold in 
the nursery trade in the Southeast, and its general 
appearance is similar to this species although it does not 
naturally occur on the coastal dunes.  Besides this habitat 
difference, other distinguishing characteristics are the awn 
on the upper glume is shorter or absent, the awn on the 
lemma is shorter, and the setaceous teeth are either absent 
or very short for M. capillaris compared to M. filipes. 
 
Distribution: The native range and distribution of 
gulfhairawn muhly extends along the coast of North 
Carolina, south to Florida, and west to Texas.  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Habitat: In the northern portion of its native range, 
gulfhairawn muhly is often found growing in association 
with saltmeadow cordgrass [Spartina patens (Aiton) 
Muhl.] and dune fingergrass [Eustachys petraea (Sw.) 
Desv.].  This community is found in broad grassy swards 
in the interdune or slack areas of the barrier islands 
behind the primary dune and in front of the maritime 
forest; one name given to this ecological community is 
maritime wet grassland.  Farther south into northern 
Florida, this community type is generally found in narrow 
bands between dune ridges.  In the southern portion of the 
state, gulfhairawn muhly can be found on the coast in 
association with another plant community that includes 
beach creeper (Ernodea littoralis Sw.) and seaoats 
(Uniola paniculata L.) and also further inland growing in 
seasonally wet prairies and pine barrens. 
 
Adaptation 
Gulfhairawn muhly can tolerate the harsh coastal 
environment, which is subject to high temperatures, storm 
surges, and frequent inundation.  The soils on which this 
grass is often found have a high water table.  Long-term 
survival of native stands may be dependent on this 
hydroperiod regime, where soils remain wet during all but 
the driest season of the year.  There is generally a much 
higher soil organic content than is found in the adjacent 
dunes and pH levels range from 6.0-8.5. 
 
Establishment 
Coastal restoration planting sites should be chosen that 
mimic the sites in which gulfhairawn muhly would be 
found in nature.  Therefore, it should be planted on back 
dune areas, not on the fore dunes, where plants will be 
exposed to more sand movement and salt spray.  Any 
necessary reshaping or other mechanical operations 
should be completed before the planting is installed. 
 
A 3- by 3-foot or 4- by 4-foot spacing mimics its natural 
spacing.  Crowns should be set about 2 inches below the 
soil surface.  A slow-release fertilizer and/or a hydrophilic 
polymer gel can be placed in the planting hole.  In inland 
cultivation, irrigate the plants weekly.  For additional 
information on planting techniques, refer to the 

 

 

publication “Native Plants for Coastal Dune Restoration: 
What, When and How for Florida”, located at 
http://www.plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov/pubs/flpmspu7474.pdf.   
 
Management 
Established plants should require little additional fertilizer 
or pesticide applications.  Plants planted on beaches do 
not need renovation.  If plants in landscape settings are to 
be renovated, the optimum cutting height to maintain 
plant health and clear out dead leaves is about 6 to 8 
inches above the ground surface.  A lower mowing height 
destroys superficial growing points and weakens the 
plant.  Renovation cutting should be done while the plant 
is dormant prior to the onset of rapid spring growth and is 
usually done in January in the Charleston area.  
Gulfhairawn muhly should never renovated by burning 
during the dormant season. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
No serious pests of gulfhairawn muhly have been 
reported. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
An environmental assessment has been conducted for this 
species  and  no  known  serious  environmental  concerns 
were found. 
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
The seed does not easily shed out of the seedhead at 
maturity and needs to age on the plant for a time before it 
is harvested.  In South Carolina, gulfhairawn muhly 
flowers from mid-September to late October and seed can 
be collected between Thanksgiving and Christmas.  
Phenological differences between ecotypes of 
gulfhairawn muhly from different geographic locations 
have been documented.  It is not currently known if this 
species is cross- or self-pollinated or if it produces seed 
without fertilization by apomixis.  Therefore, in order to 
maintain genetic purity when producing seed of a specific 
ecotype or named variety, seed production blocks should 
be isolated from other ecotypes of this species and 
possibly from other Muhlenbergia species (i.e., capillaris) 
until it can be shown that they will not interbreed.  
Minimum isolation distances are 150 feet; however, 
distances of up to a mile may be needed if there are no 
barriers to prevent pollen movement between blocks.  
Seed germinates readily without treatment.  Due to its 
small size, seed should be sown on the surface or only 
lightly covered with potting soil. 
 
In nursery production systems, gulfhairawn muhly plants 
can also be propagated by division.  It is important to not 
divide the clump into sections that are less than ½ inch in 
diameter, because survival of smaller sections is poor.  
Shoots should be trimmed before dividing so that the 
clumps are easier to handle. 
 

A tray with large, cone-like deep plugs (i.e., 1-inch 
diameter by 6-inch deep) should be used when producing 
plants for coastal restoration plantings or 1-gallon nursery 
containers should be used for ornamental production.  The 
growing medium should allow for ample drainage and 
should be kept moist, but not wet, to aid root growth of 
this coastal species.  Seedlings and divisions will require 
fertilization throughout the nursery production period and 
can be fertilized with a low to medium rate of either slow 
release fertilizer or a liquid fertilizer solution. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
Sea Islands germplasm sweetgrass (gulfhairawn muhly) 
was collected by Robert J. Dufault, Professor of 
Horticulture at Clemson University from the beach fronts 
on Kiawah Island, SC, and Little St. Simons Island, GA.  
This selected-class release has not been widely tested 
outside of South Carolina.  The Corps of Engineers, 
Charleston District is currently using it in coastal 
restoration plantings to provide a source of material for 
the local Gullah basketmakers to harvest for base material 
and for soil stabilization.  For more information on the 
availability and use of Sea Islands germplasm sweetgrass, 
contact the Natural Resources Conservation Service, 
Brooksville Plant Materials Center.  Or you can contact 
your local Natural Resources Conservation Service 
(formerly Soil Conservation Service) office for more 
information.  Look in the phone book under United States 
Government.  The Natural Resources Conservation 
Service will be listed under the subheading “Department 
of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Burke, M.K. and A.C. Halfacre.  2003.  Decline of 
 
 
Dufault, R.J., M. Jackson, and S.K. Salvo.  1993.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Edwards, S.  1992.  Saving the sweetgrass.  Soil and 
 
Gustafson, D.J., A.C. Halfacre, and R.C. Anderson.  
 
 
 
 
 
Hitchcock, A. S.  1971.  Manual of the grasses of the 
 
 
 

Sweetgrass: History, basketry, and constraints to 
industry growth.  p. 442-445.  In J. Janick and J.E. 
Simon (eds.).  New Crops.  Wiley, New York.  
Available at 
http://www.hort.purdue.edu/newcrop/proceedings19
93/v2-442.html.  (accessed 30 Mar. 2009).  

2008.  Practical seed source selection for restoration 
projects in an urban setting: Tallgrass prairie, 
serpentine barrens, and coastal habitat examples 
[Online].  Available at http://urbanhabitats.org.  
Urban Habitats Vol. 5, No. 1. 

sweetgrass spurs restoration of prairie habitat.  Ecol. 
Rest. 22: 50-51. 

Water Cons. News 12:15.  

United States.  In two Volumes.  2nd Ed.  Revised 
by Agnes Chase.  USDA Misc. Pub. 200.  Dover 
Publications, Inc., New York. 

 

Available at http://plants.usda.gov/ (accessed 11 
May 2009).  National Plant Data Center, Baton 
Rouge, LA.  

2008.  Evaluation of sweetgrass for dune restoration 
in coastal South Carolina.  p. 159.  In Proc. of the 
Sixth Eastern Native Grass Symposium, Columbia, 
SC, 7-10 Oct. 2008, Clemson, Univ., Agric, Forestry 
and Life Sci., Clemson, SC.  

Peterson, P.M.  2003.  Muhlenbergia Schreb. Pp. 145-
201. In Magnoliophyta: Commelindidae (in part): 
 
 
Poaceae, part 2.  Flora of North America North of 
Mexico, Volume 25. M.E. Barkworth, K.M. Kapels, 
 
S. Long, and M.B. Piep. Oxford University Press, 
 
New York.  Available at 
 
http://herbarium.usu.edu/webmanual/.  (accessed 13 
 
Apr. 2007, verified 11 May 2009).  Intermountain 
 
 
Herbarium, Utah State Univ. Logan, UT.  
Pinson, J.N., Jr., and W.T. Batson.  1971.  The status of 
 
Muhlenbergia filipes Curtis (Poaceae).  J. Mitchell 
 
Soc. 87: 188-191.  
USDA, NRCS.  2009.  The PLANTS Database [Online].  
 
 
 
Williams, M.J., C.A. Gresham, and J.M. Whetstone.  
 
 
 
 
 
Wunderlin, R.P., and B.F. Hansen. 2008. Atlas of Florida 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prepared By 
Janet Grabowski 
USDA NRCS 
Brooksville Plant Materials Center, Brooksville, Florida 
 
Species Coordinator 
M.J. Williams 
USDA NRCS, Gainesville, Florida 
 
Published: July 2009 
 
Edited: 8 June 2009 

Vascular Plants [Online]. Available at 
http://www.florida.plantatlas.usf.edu/ .  (accessed 11 
May 2009).  [S.M. Landry and K.N. Campbell 
(application development), Florida Center for 
Community Design and Research.] Institute for 
Systematic Botany, Univ. of South Florida, Tampa, 
FL. 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

 
 
 
 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

