 
 

 

Plant Guide

biodiesel fuel. Fuel properties of the methyl ester of 
Maclura pomifera were found to be very similar to 
the values set forth by the American Society of 
Testing and Materials (ASTM) for petroleum diesel 
(No. 2) by Saloua et al. in 2009. Smith and Perino 
(1981) noted that a potentially important economic 
use for Osage orange is in the proteolytic enzyme 
found in the fruit. These enzymes break down 
proteins into peptides and amino acids for use in 
cheese making, meat tenderization, clearing and chill 
proofing beer, and other industrial and commercial 
uses. Phytochemicals from plants have been 
extensively studied for their antioxidant activities. 
The intake of antioxidant-rich diets has been 
associated with reduced incidence of chronic diseases 
such as cancer and cardiovascular diseases. Tsao      
et al. (2003) studied the two predominant isoflavones, 
osajin and pomiferin, in Osage orange for their 
antioxidant activity. Pomiferin was found to be a 
strong antioxidant comparable to the antioxidant 
vitamins C and E. Osajin showed no apparent 
antioxidant activity. Although Osage orange is not a 
human food source, it is considered to be safe and, 
therefore, a potentially good source of antioxidant 
nutraceuticals and functional food ingredients.  

Status 
Osage orange is a pioneering species forever 
invading exposed mineral soils, particularly 
overgrazed pastures and abandoned crop fields. Other 
tree species frequently found in these areas include: 
Juniperus virginiana, Robinia pseudoacacia, 
Gleditsia triacanthos and Crataegus sp.  
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Weediness 
Osage orange has the potential to invade areas abused 
by poor management and the over grazing of range or 
pasture land. The plant may become weedy or 
invasive in some regions or habitats and may displace 
desirable vegetation if not properly managed.  Please 
consult with your local NRCS Field Office, 
Cooperative Extension Service office, state natural 
resource, or state agriculture department regarding its 
status and use.  Weed information is also available 
from the PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/.  
Please consult the Related Web Sites on the Plant 
Profile for this species for further information. 
 

 

 OSAGE ORANGE 

Maclura pomifera (Rafin.)  C.K. Schneider  

Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center 
Manhattan, Kansas 

Plant Symbol =MAPO 

 

 

Fruit and leaf of Osage orange plant from the PLANTS Database 
website. Photo by Jeff McMillian. 

Alternate Names: bodark, hedge apple, horse-apple, 
naranjo chino, hedge, and Bois d’Arc.  

Uses 
Historically it was used by Native American tribes to 
produce wooden bows thus the French name bois 
d’arc or ‘wood of the bow’. Large scale use of the 
tree for hedges was first proposed in the 1850’s by 
John A. Wright, editor of the Prairie Farmer and his 
friend professor Jonathan B. Turner (Smith and 
Perino, 1981). Professor Turner was convinced that 
Osage orange was the perfect plant to fence the 
prairie. By 1855 Osage orange made fencing entire 
prairie farms practical, and the practice had spread 
rapidly throughout the prairie states to most of the 
eastern states. Then the invention of woven and barb 
wire caused the hedge row to be used less from 1875 
forward. Today Osage orange trees are used for fence 
posts, due to their unusual ability to resist decay from 
soil born organisms, to provide livestock enclosures. 
Both song birds and upland game birds find shelter 
and food below its low hanging branches. Squirrels 
tear the fruit apart to get at the seeds which they use 
for food (Stephens, 1973). Recently Osage orange 
has been getting attention as a plant that contains 
chemical properties that are economically important. 
Oil extracted from the seed of Osage orange was 
investigated as an alternative for the production of 

 

 

Description 
General:  Osage orange belongs to the Moraceae, or 
mulberry family. Maclura is named in honor of 
William Maclure (1763 – 1840), an early American 
geologist; pomifera means “fruit-bearing” from the 
large fruits (Stephens, 1969). It is a small to medium 
sized tree 12 to 20 meters (m) tall, with deeply 
furrowed bark and thorny branches. The trunk is 
usually short and divides into several prominent 
limbs with upward arching branches. Lower branches 
droop toward the ground and create dense shade 
under the tree. Lower branches that have died remain 
on the tree for years, indicating that Osage orange 
does not self prune. The root system is diffuse and 
covers large areas with its lateral spread. Osage 
orange has the potential to be fairly long lived tree 
with reports of specimens reaching 150 years old 
(McCurdy et al., 1972). Leaves are deciduous, 
simple, and alternate or clustered at the ends of short 
spurs. Their shape ranges from broad-ovate to ovate-
lanceolate, rounded or subcordate at the base to 
broadly cuneate or acuminate at the apex. Leaves are 
4-12 centimeters (cm) long, 2-6 cm wide and have 
entire margins. Leaf blades are dark green, smooth 
and waxy above; paler green with a few hairs 
beneath. Autumn color is a translucent yellow. Osage 
orange are dioecious and wind pollinated with 
flowers appearing in mid-May to June after leaves. 
The staminate flowers are globular or in short 
cylindrical clusters, green, hairy, with 4 stamens and 
large yellow anthers, but no petals. The pistillate 
flowers are in dense, globular clusters, 1.5 – 2.5 cm  
 in diameter at the base of a leaf. The ovary is 
greenish in color and small, flat, and circular with 
long yellowish thread-like stigmas. The fruit or 
“Hedge ball” is produced in September and is a 
multiple fruit consisting of many 1-seeded druplets 
fused into a globose, yellow-green structure 
approximately 8 to 12 cm in diameter. Female trees 
may start to bear fruit at about ten years of age. Fruits 
average 450 grams (g) in weight, but range from 150           
to 700g. The individual oval shaped seeds are 
imbedded in the fleshy calyx and are 8 to 12 
millimeters (mm) long. Cleaned seed weight 
averaged 30,900/kg with a range of 15,400 to 
35,300/kg (Bonner and Karrafalt, 2008). The seeds 
are initially cream colored, but turn brown with age 
and exposure to air. 
 
Distribution:  Although the extent of the natural 
distribution of Osage orange is in doubt there is little 
question that it grew best on the rich bottomlands of 
the Red River between Texas and Oklahoma. The 
planting of Osage orange for hedges in the 1850’s 
greatly extended its distribution. Osage orange can 
now be found from southeastern Canada to Colorado 
to almost all of the states east of the Mississippi 
River. For current distribution, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site. 

 

 
Habitat: Rich woods along streams and flood plains; 
hillsides in open, rocky pastures. It can be planted in 
a wind break setting along fields and roads. It does 
require full sun to be productive, no shade tolerance.  

Adaptation 
The Osage orange is a good pioneering species 
because it can tolerate many different soil types. It 
has natural protection from grazing and it prefers full 
sunlight. Osage orange is not a constituent of any 
mature forest association (Smith and Perino, 1981). 

Establishment 
Untreated seed should be sown in the fall, but 
prechilled treated seed are necessary for spring 
planted seed. Osage orange seed should be prechilled 
at 41 degrees Fahrenheit (°F) for 30 days before 
seeding (Young and Young, 1992).  

Management 
Seeds extracted from fruit fermented over winter in a 
cold state do not require prechilling in the spring. 
Seeds may be drilled in rows 20 to 30 cm apart, or in 
bands 7.5 to 10 cm wide. They should be covered 
with 0.6 to 1.25 cm of soil. Fall seeded beds should 
be mulched while spring seeded beds do not need 
mulching. Recommended bed densities are 100 to 
160 seedlings per meter squared (Bonner and 
Karrafalt, 2008).  

Pests and Potential Problems 
Osage orange is host to a number of fungal, viral and 
insect pests. Plese and Milicic (1973) determined that 
in Yugoslavia two viral diseases were causing 
ringspots on leaves and the second disease produced 
mosaic symptoms on leaves. A field survey to 
determine the extent of foliar oxidant injury on 
woody plants in New Jersey and southwestern 
Pennsylvania found no observable symptoms on 
Maclura pomifera (Rhoads et al, 1980). 

Environmental Concerns 
Osage orange tends to have an invasive nature when 
exposed to poorly managed range and pasture land 
like other woody species. Found on idle acres and on 
abandoned farm land near hedge row plantings.  

Control 
Please contact your local agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method.   

Seeds and Plant Production 
Osage orange is easy to propagate from seed. Fruits 
can be collected in the fall. However, cleaning and 
extracting seed from the fruits are easiest if the fruit 
is stored in a moist place and allowed to decay for 

several months. Seeds can then be extracted in water 
by macerating the fruit and then floating off the pulp 
or screening it off. The average Osage orange fruit 
contains from 200 to 300 seeds per fruit.   
Osage orange can also be propagated by softwood 
cuttings in June or by hardwood cuttings harvested in 
January. Softwood cuttings should be treated with 
indole butyric acid (IBA) at 5,000 to 10,000 parts per 
million (PPM) and placed in sand beds under mist 
conditions (Dirr and Heuser, 1987). Hardwood 
cuttings from previous seasons growth should be 
placed in a cool greenhouse and provided bottom 
heat (68 °F) and 5,000 to 10,000 ppm IBA quick dip 
to encourage rooting of the cuttings. Covering of 
hardwoods with an opaque poly sheet will delay 
shoot development. Rooting is possible in six weeks 
with this method. Root cuttings taken in fall or early 
winter are also a possible source of vegetatively 
produced materials. 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Horticulturally desirable varieties of Osage orange 
would be thornless and fruitless. Several selections of 
male trees have been selected and propagated for 
these specific features. ‘Wichita’ was a selection by 
John Pair, horticulturist for Kansas State University. 
‘White Shield’ was an Oklahoma source of a 
fruitless, thornless male clone whose origin was 
along White Shield Creek in western Oklahoma.  

choose your tree. Southern Illinois University Press, 
Carbondale, IL. 

pomifera. Phytopath Z. 77: 178-183. 

insensitive to oxidant pollution in New Jersey and 
southwestern Pennsylvania. Plant Disease. 64: 1106-1108. 

manual. Agriculture Handbook 727. USDA Forest Service. 

woody plant propagation:from seed to tissue culture. Varsity 
Press, Athens, GA.  

References 
 Bonner, F.T. and R.P. Karrafalt (eds.) 2008. The woody plant seed 
 
 Dirr, M.A. and C.W. Heuser. 1987. The reference manual of 
 
 
McCurdy, D.R., W.G. Spangenberg, and C.P. Datz. 1972. How to 
 
 
 Plese, N. and D Milicic. 1973. Two viruses isolated from Maclura 
 
 Rhoads, A., R. Harkov, and E Brennan. 1980. Trees relatively 
 
 
 Saloua, F., S. Chatti and Z. Hedi. 2009. Methyl ester of [Maclura 
pomifera (Rafin.) Schneider] seed oil: Biodiesel production 
 
and characterization. Bioresource Technology 101: 3091-
 
 
3096. 
 Smith, S.L. and J.V. Perino. 1981. Osage orange (Maclura 
 
 
 Stephens, H.A. 1969. Trees, shrubs, and woody vines in Kansas. 
 
 Stephens, H.A. 1973. Woody plants of the north central plains. 
 
 Tsao, R., R. Yang, and J.C. Young. 2003. Antioxidant isoflavones 
 
 
 Young J.A. and C.G. Young. 1992. Seeds of woody plants in 
 
 
 

pomifera): history and economic uses. Economic Botany. 35: 
24-41. 

University Press of Kansas. Lawrence, KS. 

University Press of Kansas. Lawrence, KS.  

in Osage orange, Maclura pomifera (Raf.) Schneid.     J. 
Agric. Food Chem. 51: 6445-6451.  

North America: revised and enlarged edition. Dioscorides 
Press. Portland, OR. 

 

Prepared By:  Richard L. Wynia, USDA-NRCS 
Manhattan Plant Materials Center 

Citation 
Wynia, R., 2011. Plant Guide for Osage orange 
(Maclura pomifera). USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Manhattan Plant Materials 
Center. Manhattan, KS 66502. 

Published: March, 2011 
Edited:  

For more information about this and other plants, 
please contact your local NRCS field office or 
Conservation District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ 
and visit the PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant Materials Program 
Web site http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS Database is not responsible for the content 
or availability of other Web sites. 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

