SMOOTHSTEM 
BLAZINGSTAR 

Mentzelia laevicaulis (Hook.) 

Torr. & A. Gray 
Plant Symbol = MELA2 

 
Contributed by: NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Pullman, Washington 
 

 
 

 

Plant Guide

mumps, measles and smallpox, as well as other 
complicated diseases.  They also used the roots for 
thirst prevention.  The Gosiute applied an infusion of 
the roots to bruised swellings.  The Montana and 
Mendicino made a decoction of the leaves and 
applied it as a wash for skin diseases, and drank it for 
stomachaches.  The Paiute used it as a source of food; 
they cooked the seeds in water and used it for a gravy 
(Native American Ethnobotany Database 2010). 
 
Ornamental:  Hitchcock and Cronquist (1973) state 
this and a related species, M. decapetala are 
“beautiful-flowered and desirable garden subjects for 
dry areas, especially the eastern Cascades”.  
According to Mee et al (2003) the plant is well-suited 
for a rock garden, steppe garden, or rocky slopes and 
is self seeding.  However, it is difficult to transplant 
due to its taproot and barbed leaves. 

Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Weediness 
This plant has a weedy appearance and is often found 
growing in association with weeds, however it is not 
weedy; it does not aggressivelydominate an area. 

Mentzelia laevicaulis.  Sheri Hagwood, USDA NRCS 
PLANTS Database 

 

Alternate Names 
Blazing star, giant blazingstar, blazing-star mentzelia, 
beautiful blazingstar, stickleaf, Bartonia laevicaulis 
Douglas, Nuttallia laevicaulis (Douglas) Greene 

Uses 
Pollinator Habitat: Smoothstem blazingstar is a 
source of nectar and pollen for native bees, butterflies 
and moths (Mee et al 2003). 
 
Rangeland: This plant can be used for revegetation 
and diversification of rangeland, particularly on 
harsh, rocky sites. 
 
Forage: Smoothstem blazingstar is undesirable as 
forage to both livestock and wildlife. 
 
Ethnobotanical: The Cheyenne used the roots of this 
plant to treat rheumatism, arthritis, earaches, fevers, 

 

 

Bumble bee visiting a Mentzelia laevicaulis flower.  
Pamela Pavek 

Description 
General: Loasa family (Loasaceae).  Mentzelia 
laevicaulis is a native biennial or short-lived 
perennial that has a deep taproot and a single, 

branched stem 0.3 to 1 m (1 to 3.2 ft) tall.  Leaves are 
3 to 15 cm (1.2 to 6 in) long, lobed, alternate, brittle, 
and have a barbed pubescence that cause the leaf to 
“readily [attach] to any foreign object touched” 
(Hitchcock and Cronquist 1973).  The plant blooms 
June through September (Knopf 2001).  Flowers are 
star-like, yellow, and have 5 linear, sharp-pointed 
petals 2.5 to 8 cm (1 to 3 in) long.  The flower also 
has about 50 filaments, 2 to 4 cm (0.8 to 1.6 in) long.  
Five of the outer filaments are sometimes flattened, 
have no anthers and have the appearance of petals, 
however are narrower than the true petals (Hitchcock 
and Cronquist 1973).  Some sources report flowers 
fully bloom only when the sun is bright (Lyons and 
Merliees 1995) however others claim flowers are 
fully open only during nighttime hours (Grant 1983).  
The flower has one style which extends above the 
cup-shaped nectary on top of the inferior ovary 
(Grant 1983).  The ovary is one-celled and develops 
into a cylindrical capsule 1.5 to 3.5 cm (0.6 to1.4 in) 
long.  It contains multiple grayish-brown, flattened 
and wing-margined seeds (Darlington 1934; 
Hitchcock and Cronquist 1973; Burke Museum of 
Natural History and Culture 2010).   

 

Mentzelia laevicaulis seeds.  Robert J. Gibbons, U.S. 
National Seed Herbarium 

The genus name Mentzelia refers to Christian 
Mentzel (1622-1701) who was a German botanist, 
botanical author, philologist, personal physician to 
the Elector of Brandenburg, and the father of the first 
King of Prussia (Charters 2010). The species name 
laevicaulis translates to smooth-stemmed in Latin 
(Charters 2010).  The description smooth-stemmed is 
relative; the upper stems of M. laevicaulis are 
typically covered with short and stiff barbed hairs, 
however the stems are smoother than other Mentzelia 
species (Rogers 2003). 
 
This plant was first named by David Douglas, who 
collected it “on the gravelly island and rocky shores 
of the Columbia [River] near the ‘Great Falls’” 
(Darlington 1934).  Douglas named the plant 
Bartonia laevicaulis.  Sir William Hooker published 
this name along with the first description of the plant 
in 1834 in a section of Flora Boreali-Americana.  

John Torrey and Asa Gray changed the name of the 
plant to Mentzelia laevicaulis in 1840 when they 
published Flora of North America (Darlington 1934). 
 
Distribution: Mentzelia laevicaulis is found in most 
western states: Colorado, Wyoming, Utah, Nevada, 
Idaho, Montana, Washington, Oregon, and 
California, and the Canadian province of British 
Columbia. The taxon is divided into two varieties 
(ecotypes): M. laevicaulis var. laevicaulis  and M. 
laevicaulis var. parviflora.  Var. laevicaulis is found 
throughout the entire range of the species and has 
petals at least 4 cm (1.6 in) long and seed capsules 
more than 2 cm (0.8 in) long.  Var. parviflora is 
found only in Washington and British Columbia, and 
has petals 1.5 to 4 cm (0.6 to 1.6 in) long and seed 
capsules less than 2 cm (0.8 in) long (Hitchcock and 
Cronquist 1973, USDA NRCS PLANTS Database 
2010). For current distributions, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site. 
 
Habitat: Smoothstem blazingstar grows in mountain 
brush, pinyon-juniper, shrub steppe, cool desert 
shrub, salt desert shrub, and ponderosa pine habitats 
(Lyons and Merilees 1995; Mee et al 2003).    

Adaptation 
This plant is adapted to open, sunny areas receiving 
18 to 38 cm (7 to 15  in) precipitation at elevations up 
to 2,700 m (8,000 ft) (Rogers 2003).  It grows in dry, 
sandy or gravelly soil, on disturbed sites, road cuts 
and talus slopes, in canyons, valleys and dry foothills 
(Darlington 1934; Mee et al 2003). 

Establishment 
Mentzelia laevicaulis can be established by seed or 
transplanted seedlings.  Seed should be planted in a 
late dormant winter planting (November or 
December) with a drill into a weed-free seed bed at a 
rate of 6 kg PLS/ha (7 lbs PLS/ac) (Lambert 2005) 
and at a depth of 1.3 – 0.6 cm (0.5 – 0.25 in).  If 
included in a mix the seed rate should be adjusted 
according to the proportion of the mix, and if the seed 
is broadcast the rate should be doubled.      
   
Seedlings are difficult to transplant due to their 
taproot which prevents a tight plug from developing.  
Also the barbed pubescence on the leaves causes the 
plants to cling to each other and to clothing.  Skinner 
(2007) states “because of this, care must be exercised 
in handling the plants to prevent uprooting of the 
seedlings.  Uprooted seedlings do not survive when 
replanted”. Transplanted seedlings should be spaced 
0.6 to 0.9 m (2 to 3 ft) apart. 
 
Seedlings planted at the Washington State University 
Experiment Station in Othello were slow to establish.  
Only when temperatures increased in mid June did 

 

 

they begin to grow rapidly.  Plants did not survive the 
first winter, however produced new plants by seed.   

Management 
Managing weeds with hand hoes and wheel hoes can 
be detrimental to Mentzelia laevicaulis plants.  Plants 
barely touched with equipment can dislodge from the 
ground.  For this reason, it may be impossible to 
mechanically harvest seed of Mentzelia laevicaulis, 
unless the plant is treated like an annual and reseeded 
every year.   

Pests and Potential Problems 
None 

Environmental Concerns 
None 

Seeds and Plant Production 
There are 660,000 seeds per kilogram (300,000 seeds 
per pound) (Lambert 2005).  The seed requires a 
cold-moist stratification period for optimal 
germination.  Skinner (2007) found 10% seed 
emergence without stratification, 48% emergence 
with 30 days stratification, and 65% emergence with 
more than 90 days stratification.  Also, some seed 
germinated after a second winter.  The author 
obtained 99% emergence in cones seeded with 2 – 3 
seeds per cone after 60 days of stratification.   
 
Seedlings can be produced by sowing the seed in 
containers in the fall outdoors and moving the 
containers into a greenhouse in January.  
Germination begins in 6 to 7 days and is complete in 
10 to 12 days (Skinner 2007).  In April the plants can 
be moved to a cold-frame for 2 to 4 weeks to be 
hardened off prior to transplanting in late April or 
early May.  If planting earlier is necessary to take 
advantage of the spring moisture (on very dry sites) 
the stratification period could be moved ahead or an 
artificial stratification procedure could be used 
(Skinner 2007). 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
None 

References 
Burke Museum of Natural History and Culture.  

[Online]. Available at: 
http://biology.burke.washington.edu/herbarium/i
magecollection.php (accessed 17 Dec 2010). 
University of Washington, Seattle, WA. 

Charters, M.L. 2010.  California Plant Names: Latin 
and Greek Meanings and Derivations. [Online] 
Available at: 
http://www.calflora.net/botanicalnames/  
(accessed 16 Dec 2010).  

 

 

 

Darlington, J. 1934. A monograph of the genus 

Mentzelia. Annals of the Missouri Botanical 
Garden 21:103 –226. 

Grant, V. 1983. The systematic and geographical 

distribution of hawkmoth flowers in the 
temperate North America flora. Bot. Gaz. 
144:439 -449. 

Hitchcock, C.L. and A. Cronquist. 1973. Flora of the 

Pacific Northwest. University of Washington 
Press, Seattle and London. 

Knopf, A.A. 2001. National Audubon Society Field 

Guide to Wildflowers, Western Region. 
Chanticleer Press, New York, NY. 

 
Lambert, S. 2005. Guidebook to the Seeds of  Native 

and Non-Native Grasses, Forbs and Shrubs of 
the Great Basin.  Idaho BLM Technical Bulletin 
2005-04. United States Department of the 
Interior, Bureau of Land Management, Boise, 
ID. 

Lyons, C.P. and B. Merilees. 1995. Trees, Shrubs and 

Flowers to Know in Washington and British 
Columbia. Lone Pine Publishing, Auburn, WA 
and Vancouver, BC. 

Mee, W., J. Barnes, R. Kjelgren, R. Sutton, T. Cerny, 
C. Johnson. 2003.  Waterwise:  Native Plants for 
Intermountain Landscapes. Utah State University 
Press, Logan, UT. 

Native American Ethnobotany Database. 2010. 

[Online] Available at http://herb.umd.umich.edu/ 
(Accessed 16 Dec 2010). University of 
Michigan, Dearborn, MI. 

Rogers, D. Mentzelia laevicaulis (Douglas) Torrey & 

Gray, Blazing Star. Double Cone Quartlerly. 
Ventana Wilderness Alliance Vol. VI No. 2. 
[Online] Available at: 
http://www.ventanawild.org/news/fe03/mentzeli
a.html (Accessed 16 Dec 2010).  

Skinner, Dave. 2007. Propagation protocol for 

production of container Mentzelia laevicaulis 
(Dougl. ex Hook.) Torr. & Gray plants; USDA-
NRCS Pullman Plant Materials Center, Pullman 
WA. In: Native Plant Network [Online] 
Available at: http://www.nativeplantnetwork.org 
(Accessed 16 Dec 2010). University of Idaho, 
College of Natural Resources, Forest Research 
Nursery, Moscow, ID. 

 
Prepared By 
Pamela L.S. Pavek, USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Pullman, Washington 
Citation 
Pavek, P.L.S. 2011. Plant guide for smoothstem 
blazingstar (Mentzelia laevicaulis).  USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Pullman, WA. 

Published September 2011 
Edited: 10Aug11plsp; 01Sept11jab 

 

For more information about this and other plants, 
please contact your local NRCS field office or 
Conservation District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ 
and visit the PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant Materials Program 
Web site http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or 
availability of other Web sites. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

