 
 

 

Plant Guide

status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Description 
General:  Grassy tarweed is an aromatic annual herb 
growing up to 36 inches in height; its stems are branching 
and hairy (Cronquist, 1961; Jepson Flora Project, 2012).  
The leaves are up to 4 inches long and covered in soft 
hairs and stalked resin glands.  The flowers are racemes 
or panicle-like structures with 3 to 9 lemon yellow ray 
flowers and 2 to 12 disk flowers.  The seeds are brown to 
black, often mottled achenes. 
Distribution:  Grassy tarweed is native to western North 
America from southern British Columbia to northern Baja 
California and east to Utah and Montana, at elevations 
from sea level to 7,800 ft (Cronquist, 1961; Jepson Flora 
Project, 2012; USDA-NRCS, 2012).  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site. 
Habitat:  Grassy tarweed grows on open or partially 
shaded slopes or in flats in grasslands, meadows, 
shrublands, woodlands, forests, disturbed sites, stream 
banks, and roadsides (Jepson Flora Project, 2012).  This 
species is found in full sun along roadsides and in other 
openings created by natural or manmade disturbance. 

Adaptation 
Grassy tarweed is adapted to quickly cover recently 
disturbed land.  It often grows in coarse, sandy or gravelly 
soils, but is also found on silty/clayey soils, and 
sometimes on serpentine soils.  It prefers full sun, but can 
tolerate light shade (Cronquist, 1961). 

Establishment 
Seeds germinate in cool temperatures and naturally 
germinate in late fall.  Seeds should be broadcast on the 
site in the fall so they can germinate and become 
established over the winter.  There are approximately 
300,000 seeds per pound.  Sowing one pound of seed per 
acre will result in a rate of 7 seeds per square foot.  For 
solid stands, sow at a rate of 5–7 pounds per acre.   

Management 
Control of weedy perennial species that may out-compete 
grassy tarweed over time may be necessary.  
Encroachment of trees and shrubs will shade out this 
species.  Grazing and periodic burning or mowing will 
help to maintain the habitat.  Although this species is an 
annual herb, it readily self-sows and persists.  It is 
avoided by livestock due to its odor, but is not known to 
be toxic. 

Pests and Potential Problems 

GRASSY TARWEED 
Madia gracilis (Sm.) D.D. Keck 

Plant Symbol = MAGR3 

Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials 
Center, Oregon 

 
Photo by Amy Bartow, NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials Center, 2012. 

Alternate Names 
Alternate Common Names:  slender tarweed, slender 
gumweed, grassy tarplant, gumweed madia, sticky madia 
Alternate Scientific Names:  Madia dissitiflora, Madia 
gracilis spp. collina, Madia gracilis spp. pilosa 

Uses 
Pollinator habitat: Grassy tarweed attracts many native 
pollinators and other beneficial insects.  It can be included 
in roadside revegetation mixes and in pollinator 
hedgerows along farm edges.   
Wildlife: The seeds are used as food by birds and small 
mammals. 
Restoration:  This native plant is useful to help control 
erosion in areas with disturbed soils that are low in 
nutrients.  It is used for NRCS Conservation Reserve 
Program (CRP), Wetland Reserve Program (WRP), and 
Wildlife Habitat Incentives Program (WHIP) plantings. 

Ethnobotany 
People of the Mendocino, Miwok, and Pomo tribes used 
seeds of grassy tarweed to make pinole, which was a 
staple food source (Moerman, 2012). 

Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 

 

There is no current information on pests or diseases of 
this species. 

Environmental Concerns 
This plant readily self-sows and may spread and become 
weedy in pastures/rangeland or other neighboring habitat. 

Control 
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use it safely.  Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method. 

Seeds and Plant Production 
Field establishment: For best establishment in seed 
production fields, grow plugs in a greenhouse (70°F days, 
50°F nights) in late winter and transplant out in spring.  
Transplant into a field covered with weed fabric 
containing holes on 1ft by 1 ft spacing.  Seeds can also be 
sown directly into holes in the weed fabric in late fall.  
Place 10 seeds per hole (2 pounds per acre) and cover 
them lightly with soil or vermiculite.  For direct seeding 
of production fields (without weed fabric) use a rate of 50 
seeds per square foot or 6 pounds per acre.  Sow in fall at 
a depth of ¼ inch or less into rows 12 to 24 inches apart.  
Weed fabric is highly recommended because seeds shatter 
as they ripen and the fabric catches the seed so it can be 
collected after the plants are removed.  

Photo by Amy Bartow, NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials Center, 2012. 
For agronomic seed increase, hand weeding and 
fertilization may be necessary.  Types and rates of 
fertilizer have not been studied, but the application of 
nitrogen at a rate of 50 pounds per acre has boosted yields 
at the NRCS Plant Materials Center in Corvallis, Oregon.  
This species may become weedy in production areas, but 
does not become a persistent weed.  
Harvesting techniques: Seeds fall from the plant as they 
mature and can shatter over a period of weeks.  When 
seed production has commenced, cut plants at the base 
and place on tarps to dry, and then vacuum remaining 
seed off of the fabric and from the holes in the fabric. 

 

than fields with weed fabric due to high amount of 
shattering that occurs prior to and during harvest.  Plants 
can be very sticky when green and should not be 
combined until sufficiently dried and less sticky.  Seed 
yields are highly variable for this species and depend 
greatly on harvest method and size of mature plants.  In 
Corvallis, OR, yields have averaged 100 to 200 pounds 
per acre for a field without weed fabric, or 400 to 1200 
pounds per acre when using weed fabric.  

Photo by R.C. Hoffman, NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials Center, 2012. 
Seed Cleaning Techniques: Use a thresher, combine, or 
hammer mill to break seeds loose from plant material.  
Use an air screen machine to remove stems, chaff and 
unfilled seeds to reach desired purity standards. 
Distinguishing filled seed from non-filled seeds can be 
challenging with this species. 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
Seed of this species may be available from native plant 
nurseries from within its range.  Contact your local 
Natural Resource Conservation Service office for more 
information on availability. 

References 
Cronquist, A. 1961. Vascular plants of the Pacific 

Northwest. Part 5: Compositae. Univ. of Washington 
Press, Seattle. 

Jepson Flora Project. 2012 (v. 1.0). Jepson eFlora, Madia 

gracilis, B.G. Baldwin, http://ucjeps.berkeley.edu/ 
cgi-bin/get_cpn.pl?MAGR3 (accessed 8 May 2012). 
Moerman, D. 2012. Madia gracilis. In: Native American 
Ethnobotany Database [Online]. Univ. of Michigan, 
Dearborn. http://herb.umd.umich.edu/ (accessed 8 
May 2012). 

USDA-NRCS. 2012. The PLANTS Database, National 

Plant Data Team, Greensboro, NC. 
http://plants.usda.gov (accessed 8 May 2012).  

Prepared By:   
Tyler C. Ross and Amy Bartow 
USDA-NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials Center, Oregon 

Large fields, with or without weed fabric, can be directly 
combined.  This method will result in much lower yields 

Citation 

 

 

Ross, T.C. 2012. Plant guide for grassy tarweed (Madia 
gracilis). USDA-Natural Resources Conservation Service, 
Plant Materials Center, Corvallis, OR. 

PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

Published December 2012 
Edited: 13Dec2012 aym; 16Jan2013 jab 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

