 
 

 

Plant Guide

watermilfoil is a submersed, aquatic perennial in the 
Haloragaceae family that roots to the bottom of water 
bodies. The roots are slender and fragile.  Stems emerge 
from root crowns, are smooth and hairless, and grow up to 
21 feet to the water surface, where they branch profusely.  
Stems have layers of specialized, partially lignified cells 
that enable the stem to self-fragment without mechanical 
disturbance.  Stem fragments are capable of forming new 
plants.  Leaves are whorled in groups of four at the stem 
nodes, are 0.5 to 1.5 inches long, and have 14 to 24 pairs 
of threadlike divisions giving the leaf a feather-like 
appearance.  Pollen and seed flowers are separate on 
eight-inch long spikes that form at the ends of the stem 
branches.  They emerge from the water supported by the 
stem that is twice as wide as the lower portion of the 
stem.  Seed-producing flowers lack sepals and petals but 
have a four-lobed pistil.  Pollen-producing flowers have 
four pink petals that drop off early in development, and 
eight stamens.  Flowers are whorled in groups of four.  
The fruits are globelike in shape, 2-3 mm long with four 
long narrow grooves and four seeds.  

The easiest way to distinguish Eurasian watermilfoil from 
native milfoils is by lifting a stem out of the water. The 
leaves of the invasive will relax and fall against the stem 
whereas the leaves of the native will remain rigid and 
spread from the stem.  Also natives have sparse stem 
branching near the water surface  
compared to the abundant branching of Eurasian 
watermilfoil.  Natives lack the conspicuous change in 
stem width below the inflorescence compared to the 
almost doubled stem width of Eurasian watermilfoil.  The 
specialized layers of stem cells that facilitate stem 
fragmentation are characteristic of the invasive species 
and not the native species.  Eurasian watermilfoil dies 
back to propagating root crown buds in the fall, whereas 
the natives form prominent cylindrical or cup-shaped 
perennating shoots (turions) attached to, or detached from 
the parent plant. 

Adaptation:  Eurasian watermilfoil can be found on 
every continent except Antarctica.  It is native to Europe, 
Asia, and northern Africa.  It colonizes rivers, lakes, and 
other water bodies.  It grows under a range of trophic 
conditions, but it is considered an indicator of eutrophic 
(low levels of dissolved oxygen, high levels of organic 
matter) conditions. Root anchoring may be impeded by 
sand, gravel, or flocculent substrate textures. Growth is 
limited by light, preventing colonization of deep waters or 
water with high suspended particles.  Optimum water 
depth for growth ranges from three to 13 feet, and a 
maximum depth for growth is 39 feet).  Cold temperatures 
have little influence on growth except under reservoir 
drawdown conditions when plants are exposed to the air.  

EURASIAN  

WATERMILFOIL  
Myriophyllum spicatum L.  

Plant symbol = MYSP2 

Contributed by USDA NRCS Montana State Office 

 

 Photo by Alison Fox, University of Florida, available from 
Bugwood.org  
 
Caution:  This plant is weedy and may be 
invasive. 

Alternate Names: none  

Uses:  Weed beds provide habitat for freshwater 
crustaceans and cover for bass.  Where removed by 
harvesting it has been used as fertilizer, animal feed, and 
as a soil conditioner with limited success.  

Status:  Eurasian watermilfoil is a non-native, invasive, 
aquatic nuisance species listed as noxious or otherwise 
restricted in 17 states.  Please consult the PLANTS Web 
site and your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or state natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and 
management.    

Description: Myriophyllum spicatum L., Eurasian 

 

Environmental Concerns: The dense weed beds formed 
by Eurasian watermilfoil have adverse effects on native 
aquatic vegetation that are important food sources for 
waterfowl and some mammals, and habitat for fish.  The 
dense beds create habitat for disease-carrying insects, 
including mosquitoes, and parasites that cause swimmer’s 
itch.  The richness, diversity, and distribution of 
invertebrate species on lake bottoms are reduced where 
infestations occur.  The function of water ecosystems are 
altered, including biomass turnover and nutrient cycling.  
Reduced dissolved oxygen and changes in water 
temperature are associated with infestations. Eurasian 
watermilfoil is a nuisance species to humans when it 
reduces open areas along lake shores, washes up on 
beaches, and curtails recreational activities.  Populations 
reduce water flow thus interfering with industrial, 
agricultural, and municipal water systems.  Irrigation 
ditches, canals, farm ponds, and irrigation equipment can 
be clogged by the weed.  Management of Eurasian 
watermilfoil is difficult and expensive.  

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin): None.  

likelihood of Eurasian watermilfoil presence in 
lakes, a macrophyte monitoring tool.  Ecological 
Applications 10 (5): 1442-1455.  

References  
Aiken, S.G., P.R. Newroth, and I. Wile.  1979.  The 
biology of Canadian weeds. 34. Myriophyllum 
 
spicatum L.  Canadian Journal of Plant Science 59: 
 
 
201-215. 
Buchan, L.A.J. and D.K. Padilla.  2000.  Predicting the 
 
 
 
Eiswerth, M.E., S.G. Donaldson, and W.S. Johnson.  
 
 
 
 
Nichols, S.A. and B.H. Shaw.  1986.  Ecological life 
 
  Myriophyllum spicatum, Potamogenton crispus, and 
 
Piper, G.L., E.M. Coombs, B. Bloosey, P.B. McEvoy, 
and S.S. Schooler.  2004.  Eurasian watermilfoil.  
 
In: Coombs, E. M., Coombs, J.K. Clark, G.L. Piper, 
 
 
and A.F. Cofrancesco, Jr. (eds) Biological control of 
invasive plants in the United States. Oregon State 
 
 
University Press, Corvallis.  169-173.  

2000.  Potential environmental impacts and economic 
damages of Eurasian watermilfoil (Myriophyllum 
spicatum) in western Nevada and Northeastern 
California.  Weed Technology 14: 511-518.  

histories of the three aquatic nuisance plants 

Elodea Canadensis.  Hydrobiologia 131: 3-21.  

 

 

Eurasian watermilfoil can use bicarbonate as a source of 
dissolved inorganic carbon, and high growth rates and 
dominance in hard, alkaline, high pH waters is common.  
It grows vigorously in salinities up to 10 parts per 
thousand and survives at 20 parts per thousand salinity, 
the concentration of brackish water.  It can tolerate 
moving water, and water currents and wave action 
facilitate fragmentation.  

A Wisconsin study developed models to predict the 
likelihood of finding Eurasian watermilfoil based on its 
presence or absence in Wisconsin lakes.  Variables 
associated with dissolved inorganic carbon were the most 
important factors predicting occurrence.  These variables 
included alkalinity, bedrock, and forest cover.  Lakes with 
a one percent increase in forest cover in their drainage 
were five to 50 times less likely to become infested than 
other lakes.  Variables affecting Eurasian watermilfoil 
growth were better predictors of presence than variables 
indicating human activities.  The presence of a public boat 
launch was the best human activity predictor, followed by 
the relative abundance of walleye and smallmouth bass.  
Lakes with a public boat launch were 21 to 28 times more 
likely to become infested than lakes without a boat 
launch.  

Establishment: Although Eurasian watermilfoil produces 
seeds, most establishment is from stem fragments and 
root crown buds.  Propagating root crowns typically 
break dormancy in the spring when water temperature 
and light intensity increase.   

Management:  Prevention is the most important 
management option for Eurasian watermilfoil.  Mapping, 
monitoring, early detection and eradication are critical to 
prevention. If a new infestation is found, save a specimen 
and report the infestation to your county extension agent.  
Inspection and sanitation of recreational equipment will 
prevent spread. Any aquatic plant debris on boats, trailers, 
live-wells, boat bilges, and fishing equipment should be 
disposed of away from lakes, ponds and rivers. 
Establishing washing stations with sanitation instructions 
at water-based recreational sites is recommended.  
Control with herbicides requires direct application to 
water.  In most cases special permits and licenses are 
needed.  Please contact your local agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what works 
best in your area and how to use it safely.  Always read 
label and safety instructions for each control method.  
 

Pests and Potential Problems: See environmental 
concerns.  

 

 

Prepared By and Species Coordinators:   
James S. Jacobs, Plant Materials Specialist 
Montana/Wyoming, Bozeman, Montana Jane Mangold, 
Assistant Professor, Montana State University, Bozeman, 
Montana  

Citation 
Jacobs, J., Margold, J. 2009 Plant Guide for Eurasian 
watermilfoil (Myriophyllum spicatum L.). USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Montana State Office, 
Bozeman, MT  59715 

Published April, 2009 

Edited: 17 March 2009 JJ  
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

