 
 

 

Plant Guide

(Spellenberg, 2003).  The inflorescence is a cluster of 3 to 
7 magenta flowers, each approximately 1 inch in 
diameter.  Flowering typically occurs from May to early 
June.  Leaves are opposite, green above and waxy below. 
Lower leaves are widely ovate to deltoid with a rounded 
to heart-shaped base.  The plants arise from a thickened 
tuber (1.5 to 3 inches thick) which sends out shoots to 
produce daughter clones.  
  
Distribution:  
There are currently eleven known populations in Idaho 
County, Idaho and Wallowa County, Oregon.  The total 
geographic range covers approximately 29 by 18 miles 
(Kaye, 1992).  For current distribution, consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
  
Habitat:   
The species occurs in grassland habitats in steep river 
canyons from 1,000 to 3,000 feet in elevation. 
Populations occur primarily in bunchgrass communities 
dominated by bluebunch wheatgrass, Snake River 
wheatgrass,  Sandberg bluegrass, sand dropseed and 
Fendler threeawn.  Other species growing in association 
include cheatgrass, smooth sumac and rabbitbrush (USDI 
Fish and Wildlife Service, 2000).    
 
Adaptation  
MacFarlane’s four-o’clock grows in regions with warm 
and dry conditions where precipitation occurs mostly as 
rain during winter and spring.  Sites are dry and generally 
open, although scattered shrubs may be present.  Average 
annual precipitation for the region is approximately 12 
inches.  The soils vary from sandy to talus substrate 
(USDI Fish and Wildlife Service, 1996).  
  
Establishment  
Plants are established via seed dispersal as well as 
asexually from a thick woody tuber.  Seed is dispersed in 
June through July, falling near the parent plant and may 
be spread further by water, gravity or animals. 
Germination occurs in the spring under proper 
environmental conditions.  Asexual reproduction however 
appears to be the primary mechanism for spread of the 
plants. 
 
Management  
This species is currently being managed through the 
reduction of livestock grazing and the restriction of 
recreational use (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service, 2009). 
Due to the steep habitats on which the species occurs, 
weed control and wildfire suppression is difficult. Site 
specific monitoring and management plans are being 
developed by BLM and Forest Service.  Additional 

MACFARLANE’S FOUR-

O’CLOCK 

Mirabilis macfarlanei Constance 

& Rollins 

Plant Symbol = MIMA2 

Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Idaho Plant Materials 
Program 

 

Figure 1. Macfarlane's four-o'clock (Mirabilis macfarlanei). 

 
Alternate Names  
This species has no known alternate names.  
  
Status  
MacFarlane’s four-o’clock was listed endangered in 1979 
when only 3 populations were known totaling 
approximately 25 plants (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service, 
1979).  Since listing, additional populations have been 
found as a result of increased monitoring, and in 1996, the 
species was downlisted to threatened (USDI Fish and 
Wildlife Service, 1996).  The species is considered 
threatened in Idaho (State of Idaho, 2009) and endangered 
in Oregon (Oregon Department of Agriculture, 2009). 
Natureserve gives the species a global status of G2 
(imperiled), and state rankings of S2 (imperiled) in Idaho 
and S1 (critically imperiled) in Oregon (Natureserve, 
2009).  Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values).  
 
Description  
General: Four-o’clock family (Nyctaginaceae).  
MacFarlane’s four-o’clock is a perennial herb that forms 
hemispheric clumps from 23 to 32 inches across 
 

 

o’clock (Mirabilis macfarlanei). 5-year review 
summary and evaluation. USDI-USFWS. Boise, ID.  

plan for MacFarlane’s four-o’clock (Mirabilis 
macfarlanei). U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. 
Portland, OR.  

U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. 2000. Revised recovery 
 
 
 
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. 2009. MacFarlane’s four-
 
 
  
Prepared By  
Derek Tilley; Range Scientist, USDA NRCS Plant 
Materials Center, Aberdeen, Idaho.  
  
Dan Ogle; Plant Materials Specialist, USDA NRCS, 
Boise, Idaho.  
  
Loren St. John; Team Leader, USDA NRCS Plant 
Materials Center, Aberdeen, Idaho.  
  
Citation  
Tilley, D., D. Ogle, and L. St. John. 2009. Plant  guide for 
Macfarlane’s four-o’clock (Mirabilis macfarlanei). 
USDA-Natural Resources Conservation Service, Idaho 
Plant Materials Center. Aberdeen, ID. 83210.  

Published March, 2010 

Edited: 01Jan2010djt; -4Jan10dgo; 04Jan10lsj  

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

macfarlanei. Oregon Department of Agriculture. 
Salem, OR.  

insects associated with Mirabilis macfarlanei during 
bloom periods with emphasis on pollination. Boise 
State University. Boise, ID.  

studies are necessary to assess life history and ecological 
needs of the species.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems  
Large disturbances such as fire, herbicide drift and 
landslides have the potential to extirpate small 
populations.  Poorly managed grazing has also been 
indicated as a threat to MacFarlane’s four-o’clock habitat 
(USDI Fish and Wildlife Service, 2009).  
  
Lepidopterans and spittlebugs have been observed 
damaging plants (Baker, 1983; Kay et al., 1990). Feeding 
nymphs can cause floral abortion and shoot death.  These 
threats do not appear however, to significantly affect 
existing populations (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service, 
2009).  
  
The chief threat to MacFarlane’s four-o’clock is the 
degradation of habitat caused by invasion of exotic plant 
species.  Cheatgrass, yellow starthistle, toadflax and 
spotted knapweed are the major invasive species noted at 
or near established populations.   
  
References  
Baker, C. 1983. Report on field studies relative to the 
 
 
 
Kaye, T.N. 1992. Status report update for Mirabilis 
 
 
Natureserve. 2009. Comprehensive report – Mirabilis 
 
 
 
 
Oregon Department of Agriculture. 2009. Oregon listed 
 
 
 
Spellenberg, R. 2003.  Mirabilis.  In: Flora of North America 
 
 
 
State of Idaho. 2009. Federal threatened and endangered 
species in Idaho. [Online]. Available  
 
at  www.species.idaho.gov (accessed 30 Dec 2009) 
 
 
Idaho Governor’s office of conservation. Boise, ID.  
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. 1979. Determination that 
  Mirabilis macfarlanei is an endanagered species. 
 
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, 1996. Endangered and 
 
threatened wildlife and plants; reclassification of 
  Mirabilis macfarlanei (MacFarlane’s four-o’clock) 
 
 

macfarlanei. [Online]. Available at 
http://www.natureserve.org/explorer/servlet/NatureSe
rve?searchName=Mirabilis+macfarlanei (accessed 29 
December 2009). Natureserve. Arlington, VA.  

plants. [Online]. Available at  
http://oregon.gov/ODA/PLANT/CONSERVATION/s
tatelist.shtml (accessed 30 Dec 2009). Portland, OR.  

Editorial Committee, eds.  1993+.  Flora of North America 
North of Mexico.  12+  vols.  New York and Oxford.  Vol. 
4, pp. 40-56.  

Federal Register. 44(209): 61912-61913.  

from endangered to threatened status. Federal 
Register. 61(52): 10693-10697.  

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 
 

 

