 
 

 

Plant Guide

upland plant (UPL), meaning it almost always occurs 
in uplands.  Please consult the PLANTS Web site and 
your State Department of Natural Resources for this 
plant’s current status (e.g., threatened or endangered 
species, state noxious status, and wetland indicator 
values). 

Weediness 
Mountain tarweed often becomes weedy in 
overgrazed pastures and on disturbed sites such as 
roadsides and trails (Lass, 2007).  It may displace 
desirable vegetation if not properly managed.  Please 
consult with your local NRCS Field Office, 
Cooperative Extension Service office, state natural 
resource, or state agriculture department regarding its 
status and use.  Weed information is also available 
from the PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/.  
Please consult the Related Web Sites on the Plant 
Profile for this species for further information. 

Description 
General: Mountain tarweed is a strongly scented 
annual herb that may be 6 to 40 inches tall.  The 
plants may be simple or with stiff ascending 
branches.  Leaves are 1 to 4 inches in length and are 
densely pubescent (hairy) on the underside and 
sparsely covered with glandular hairs on top.  
Inflorescences are clusters of glandular flower heads 
comprised of 0–3 yellow ray flowers and 1–5 disk 
flowers.  The seed is a flat, black achene (Hickman, 
1993).   
Distribution: Mountain tarweed is the most widely 
distributed of all of the Madia species, with a native 
range covering much of the western and northern 
parts of North America from British Columbia to the 
Southwestern United States, across southwestern 
Canada and into the Rocky Mountains region.  It has 
become naturalized in Alaska and across eastern 
Canada and the north-central and northeastern U.S.  
For current distribution, please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  
Habitat: Mountain tarweed grows mostly on 
disturbed sites including openings in grasslands, 
meadows, swales, shrublands, woodlands, forests, 
edges of marshes, lakes, and roadsides at elevations 
of 0–12,000 ft (Hickman, 1993). 

Ethnobotany 
First nation people harvested the seeds to use as a 
food source and used other parts of the plant for 
medications, cures, and rituals (Moerman, 2003). 

MOUNTAIN 
TARWEED 

Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials Center, 
Oregon 

Madia glomerata Hook. 

Plant Symbol = MAGL2 

Mountain tarweed in flower at the Corvallis Plant Materials 
Center. Photo by Tyler Ross, 2012. 

Alternate Names 
Alternate Common Names: cluster tarweed, mountain 
tarplant, California dwarf-sunflower  
Alternate Scientific Names: none 

Uses 
Pollinator habitat: Mountain tarweed attracts many 
native pollinators and other beneficial insects.  It may 
be included in roadside revegetation mixes and 
pollinator hedgerows along farm edges.  It is 
particularly useful as a late season pollen source for 
native bees. 
Wildlife: The seeds (achenes) are used as food by 
birds and small mammals. 
Restoration: Mountain tarweed can be planted on 
restoration sites that contain upland areas such as 
meadows, oak savannas, or shrublands.  This species 
is used for NRCS Conservation Reserve Program 
(CRP) and Wildlife Habitat Incentives Program 
(WHIP) plantings. 

Status 
Throughout its native range in the West, mountain 
tarweed is considered a facultative upland plant 
(FACU), meaning it occasionally occurs in wetlands 
but is usually found in uplands.  Where it has become 
naturalized in Alaska, it is considered an obligate 

 

Adaptation 
Mountain tarweed is adapted to quickly cover 
recently disturbed land.  It often becomes dominant 
on overgrazed rangelands because it is avoided by 
cattle and wildlife due to its odor.  It often grows in 
coarse, sandy or gravelly soils.  It is also found 
growing in silty/clayey soils, usually in full sun.  

 Photo by Amy Bartow, NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials Center, 
2008. 

Establishment 
In trials done at the Corvallis Plant Materials Center, 
mountain tarweed seeds sown in the fall germinated 
in late winter to early spring, just as temperatures 
start to increase slightly.  Seeds sown in early spring 
also germinated well, suggesting that cold 
stratification is not required.  Seed can be broadcast 
onto sites or planted with a seed drill at a depth of ¼ 
inch.  Use a rate of 10 pounds per acre to produce a 
dense, single species stand.  For best results, seeding 
should be done in early spring to allow seedlings to 
become established while soil moisture is plentiful.  
There are 150,000 to 200,000 seeds per pound.  If 
one pound of seed is sown on one acre of land, there 
will be between 3 and 5 seeds per square foot. 

Management 
Control of weedy perennial species that may out-
compete mountain tarweed over time may be 
necessary.  Encroachment of trees and shrubs will 
shade out this species.  Grazing and periodic burning 
or mowing will help to maintain the habitat.  
Although this species is an annual herb, it readily 
self-sows and persists.  

Pests and Potential Problems 
There is no current information on pests or diseases 
of this species. 

Environmental Concerns 
This species readily self-sows and may spread and 
become weedy in pastures/rangeland or other 
neighboring habitat.  

Control 
Please contact your local agricultural extension 
specialist or county weed specialist to learn what 
works best in your area and how to use it safely.  
Always read label and safety instructions for each 
control method. 

Seeds and Plant Production 
Field establishment: For best establishment, grow 
plugs in a greenhouse in late winter and transplant 
out in spring.  Transplant into a field covered with 
weed fabric containing holes on 1ft by 1 ft spacing. 
Seeds can also be sown directly into holes in the 
weed fabric in early spring.  Place 10 seeds per hole 
(2 pounds per acre) and cover them lightly with soil 
or vermiculite.  
For direct seeding fields (without weed fabric) use a 
rate of 50 seeds per square foot or 10 pounds per 
acre.  Sow in spring at a depth of ¼ inch or less into 
rows 12 to 24 inches apart.  Weed fabric is highly 
recommended because seeds shatter as they ripen and 
the fabric catches the seed so it can be collected after 
the plants are removed.  For agronomic seed increase, 
hand weeding and fertilization may be necessary.  
This species may become weedy in production areas, 
but does not become a persistent weed. 
Harvesting techniques: Seeds fall from the plant as 
they mature and can shatter over a period of weeks.  
When seed production has commenced, cut plants at 
the base and place on tarps to dry, and then vacuum 
remaining seed off of the fabric and from the holes in 
the fabric.  Large fields, with or without weed fabric, 
can be directly combined.  This method will result in 
much lower yields than fields with weed fabric due to 
high amount of shattering that occurs prior to and 
during harvest.  Plants can be very sticky when green 
and should not be combined until sufficiently dried 
and less sticky.  
Seed Cleaning Techniques: Use a thresher, combine, 
or hammer mill to break seeds loose from plant 
material.  Use an air screen machine to remove stems, 
chaff and unfilled seeds to reach desired purity 
standards.  Distinguishing filled seed from non-filled 
seeds can be challenging with this species. Yields can 
vary widely based on field conditions and harvest 
methods, averaging between 400-1200 pounds per 
acres. 

 

 

 

Cutoff and Moscow. AquilaVision Inc, 
Missoula, MT. p. 27–28. 
www.northwestmedia.net/us95/pdf-final/Final-
Weed-Report.pdf (accessed 14 Mar. 2012). 

Moerman, D. 2003. Native American ethnobotany 

database. Univ. of Michigan, Dearborn.  
http://herb.umd.umich.edu/herb/search.pl?search
string=Madia+glomerata (accessed 24 Aug. 
2012). 

Prepared By 
Tyler C. Ross and Amy Bartow, USDA-NRCS 
Corvallis Plant Materials Center, Oregon 

 

Citation 
Ross, T.C. 2012. Plant guide for mountain tarweed 
(Madia glomerata). USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, OR. 

Published December, 2012. 

Edited: 13Dec2012 aym; 16Jan2013 jab 

For more information about this and other plants, 
please contact your local NRCS field office or 
Conservation District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ 
and visit the PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant Materials Program 
Web site http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or 
availability of other Web sites. 

Photo by Amy Bartow, NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials Center,  
2012. 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Seed of this species may be available from native 
plant nurseries from within its range.  Contact your 
local Natural Resource Conservation Service office 
for more information on availability. 

References 
Hickman, J.C. (ed.) 1993. The Jepson manual: higher 

plants of California. Univ. of California Press, 
Berkeley. 

Lass, L., and T. Prather. 2007. Cluster tarweed / 
Madia glomerata Hook.and Coast tarweed / 
Madia sativa Molina. In: A scientific evaluation 
for noxious and invasive weeds of the Highway 
95 construction project between the Uniontown 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

