 
 

 

Plant Guide

suggest powderpuff is a potential species for 
reclamation and revegetation projects (Chang, 1995). 
 
Landscape: Besides being drought tolerant, 
powderpuff is able to withstand moderate foot traffic. 
Other attributes of this plant include low growing 
height and attractive pink blooms during late spring 
and summer. 

Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Description 
General:  Powderpuff is a native, warm season 
perennial, legume which grows to approximately 
eight inches in height. Powderpuff lacks the small 
thorns along its stems found on other mimosa species 
(Ajilvsgi, 2003). Powderpuff reproduces by seed and 
stolons which root to the ground along their length as 
they spread from the mother plant (Norcini and 
Aldrich, 2009). The leaves are alternately arranged 
along the stem and are bipinnate. The leaflets are 
sensitive to contact, folding up quickly after being 
disturbed (Ajilvsgi, 2003). The plant produces a 
showy pink bloom about one inch long during the 
spring and summer. The flowers develop into small, 
flattened, oblong seed pods which turn brown when 
mature. 

Distribution:  Powderpuff is found in the 
southeastern United States. For current distribution, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species 
on the PLANTS Web site. 

Habitat:   Powderpuff is adapted to a wide range of 
soils and soil textures, but favors sandy loams. 
Suitable habitat includes prairies, grasslands, 
meadows, forest openings (Ajilvsgi, 2003), and 
roadsides (Norcini and Aldrich, 2009). 

Adaptation 
Powderpuff is adapted to well-drained sandy soils 
with a pH greater than 4.1. It grows best in full sun, 
but will tolerate some shade. 

Establishment 
A soil analysis should be conducted prior to planting 
to determine if soil amendments of phosphorus and 
potassium are needed and that soil pH is 4.2 or 
greater. Avoid fertilization with nitrogen as it will 
promote weed competition, especially from warm 

POWDERPUFF 
Mimosa strigillosa  
Torr. and A. Gray 
Plant Symbol = MIST2 

Contributed by:  USDA NRCS East Texas Plant 
Materials Center 

Powderpuff foliage and blooms. 
Photo courtesy: USDA/NRCS East Texas Plant Materials 
Center 
  

 

Alternate Names 
Powderpuff, herbaceous mimosa or sunshine mimosa 

Uses 
Livestock: Cattle will graze the leaves (Everitt and 
Lonard, 1999). 
 
Wildlife: Caterpillars of the little sulphur butterfly 
(Pyrisitia lisa) and white tailed deer feed on the 
foliage (Norcini and Aldrich, 2007) and (Everitt and 
Lonard, 1999). Honeybees also utilize powderpuff 
for pollen (Lieux, 1978).  Staff at the East Texas 
Plant Materials Center has noticed large amounts of 
insects in production fields of herbaceous mimosa 
during the spring and summer.  This combined with 
its low growth form create excellent potential as a 
bugging area for wild turkeys and poults.  Seed may 
also be utilized by both game and non-game birds. 
 
Reclamation/Revegetation: As powderpuff stems 
spread, they form an overlapping vegetative mat. The 
plant, once established, exhibits a low amount of 
evapotranspiration (Chang, 1997) and ability to 
recover from drought stress (Chang, 1995). These 
two characteristics along with its growth pattern 

 

season, annual grasses. Powderpuff, if inoculated, 
will fix its own nitrogen, and requires no additional 
nitrogen inputs. 
 
The optimum soil pH range for herbaceous mimosa is 
6.2 to 7.1. The plant will grow on soils with a pH of 
4.7. However, acidic soils with a pH of 4.1 or less are 
not suitable for the plant (Nuruddin and Chang, 
1999). 
 
Seedbed preparation should begin in advance of 
planting to help reduce weed competition. Planting 
can be completed in spring or early fall. Prepare a 
clean, weed free seedbed using tillage or herbicide 
application. Soil amendments may be added at this 
time to help incorporate them in the soil.  Prior to 
planting, the soil should be firm, not fluffy or 
powdery.   
 
Scarify and inoculate seed with strophostyles spec.1 
before planting. Scarifying (nicking or roughing the 
seed coat) seed greatly improves germination, and 
establishment time after planting. Walker (2005) 
found that mechanically scarified seed ranged in 
germination from 74 to 85 percent. Pitman (2009) 
used sandpaper to scarify powderpuff seed and had 
similar results. The average percent germination of 
unscarified seed was 14 while the scarified was 96. In 
both experiments, physically roughing the seed coat 
resulted in better seed germination than unscarified, 
chemical or heat treatments.  If scarified seed is 
unavailable, plant in the fall, and allow seed to over 
winter in the soil.    
 
For best results, use a drill type planter to ensure 
good seed to soil contact and to control planting 
depth. Broadcast seeding may be used, however 
additional cultipacking or light dragging should be 
done to cover the seed. Seed should be planted 
approximately ¼” deep. Crockett germplasm 
herbaceous mimosa contains approximately 30,000 
seeds per bulk pound. A seeding rate of seven pounds 
of pure live seed (PLS) per acre is recommended. For 
seed mixtures, reduce the seeding rate according to 
the percent desired within the mix. 
 
 

Management 
Powderpuff  is  not  an  overly  aggressive  plant  and 
other  plants  will  eventually  come  into  the  stand. 
Unwanted plants can be controlled by mowing or use 
of  an  herbicide  wick.  Glyphosate  can  be  applied  to 
treat  cool  season  weeds  after  powderpuff  goes 
dormant in the fall; however, care should be taken as 
powderpuff  may  not  become  dormant  in  the  most 
southern portions of its range. 

 

 

Pests and Potential Problems 
The caterpillar of the little sulphur butterfly (Pyristia 
lisa) feeds on powderpuff foliage.  Due to the low 
growth form of this species, fire ant mounds are a 
problem for commercial harvest and result in large 
quantities of ants in the seed hopper of the combine.  
To avoid this problem, the East Texas Plant Material 
Center treats production fields to control fire ants and 
damage to the combine header from hitting mounds.   

 
Seed and Plant Production 
Seed production fields should be drilled for 
establishment. However, trying to keep the plants in 
rows is impractical due to its spreading growth habit. 
Eventually the plants create a uniform ground cover 
which helps control weeds and soil moisture loss.  To 
reduce weed competition, fields should not be 
fertilized during their first year. Established fields 
may be fertilized with phosphorus and potassium as 
needed. Always use soil tests to determine the 
optimum rates.   
 
The East Texas Plant Material Center has used 
ammonium salts of imazapic to control weeds.   It 
should be noted that high application rates of this 
herbicide can delay seed production and create 
significant crop damage.  Application rates as high as 
6 oz/acre have been used, but effects on the crop 
were noted the following growing season.    
Application rates of 2 oz/acre seemed to give 
adequate control of most weeds with the least amount 
of damage to the crop. Weeds may also be controlled 
via mowing or the use of herbicide wicks    Mowing 
while in bloom may result in the loss of the first seed 
set.  Crockett germplasm herbaceous mimosa is quick 
to produce a secondary crop of seed after being 
mowed in mid summer.  The East Texas Plant 
Materials Center purposely mows the first crop down 
and focuses on the second seed set.  The second seed 
set produces less vegetative growth, and greatly 
reduces the amount of vegetative material in the 
harvest.  Large amounts of green material in the 
combine hopper can create a heat and damage the 
seed quickly in the summer.  It is also has a tendency 
to pack the auger tubes in the combine and is very 
difficult to clear.   
 
When combine harvesting seed, set the concave 
distance to approximately ¼ inch at its narrowest 
point, and use a moderately low fan speed.  Due to 
the height of the combine header, a slow pace must 
be used to avoid scraping the ground.  Once 
harvested, scalp as much green material as possible 
from the seed, and spread seed out on a barn floor, or 
place in a forced air dryer.  Seed remaining in seed 
pods can be separated using a hammer mill once they 
dry.  Seed can be further cleaned using air screen 
seed cleaners.   

Chang, M., C.M. Crowley and A.A. Nuruddin. 
1995. Responses of herbaceous mimosa (Mimosa 
strigillosa), a new reclamation species, to cyclic 
moisture stress. Resources, Conservation and 
Recycling 13:155-65. 

Walker, Kara. (2006). Stratification and scarification 

techniques to improve the germination rates of 
herbaceous mimosa (Mimosa strigillosa). 
(Master’s Thesis) Stephen F. Austin State 
University, Nacogdoches, Texas. 

Pitman, W. 2009. Establishment and survival of 
native legumes on upland sites in Louisiana. 
Native Plants 3:240-50. 

 
Prepared By:  Melinda Brakie, Soil Conservationist 
USDA-NRCS East Texas Plant Materials Center, 
Nacogdoches, Texas 

Citation 
Brakie, M. 2011. Plant Guide for powderpuff 
(Mimosa strigillosa). USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, East Texas Plant Materials 
Center. Nacogdoches, TX 75964. 

Published May 2011 
Edited:  

For more information about this and other plants, 
please contact your local NRCS field office or 
Conservation District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ 
and visit the PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant Materials Program 
Web site http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or 
availability of other Web sites.

 

Seedlot purity of Crockett herbaceous mimosa 
harvested at the East Texas Plant Materials Center 
has ranged from 96-99% and the average germination 
percent of scarified seed is 70%. There may be a 
decline in seed germination of seedlots that are five 
years or older. 

Above is a photo of powderpuff beginning regrowth 
after winter dormancy. Notice the runners which 
have formed a mat on the ground. Photo courtesy: 
USDA/NRCS East Texas Plant Materials Center 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Crockett germplasm herbaceous mimosa was 
released in 2006 by the USDA/NRCS East Texas 
Plant Materials Center. Crockett germplasm 
herbaceous mimosa was collected from Houston 
County, Texas. 

References 
Ajilvsgi, G. 2003. Wildflowers of Texas. Shearer 

Publishing. Fredericksburg, Texas. 

Everitt, J., D.L. Drawe and R.I. Lonard. 1999. Field 
Guide to the Broad-leaved Herbaceous Plants of 
South Texas - Used by Livestock and Wildlife. 
Texas Tech University Press. Lubbock, Texas. 

Norcini, J.G. and J.H. Aldrich. 2009. Native 

Wildflowers: Mimosa strigillosa Torr. and A. 
Gray. Florida Cooperative Extension Service 
Publication ENH 1075. 

Lieux, M.H. 1978. Minor Honeybee Plants of 

Louisiana Indicated by Pollen Analysis. 
Economic Botany, 32(4) pp. 418-432. 

Nuruddin, A.A. and M. Chang. 1999. Responses of 
herbaceous mimosa (Mimosa strigillosa), a new 
reclamation species, to soil pH. Resources, 
Conservation and Recycling 27:287-98. 

Chang, M., A.A. Nuruddin, C.M. Crowley, et al. 

1997. Evapotranspiration of herbaceous mimosa 
(Mimosa strigillosa), a new drought-resistant 
species in the southeastern United States. 
Resources, Conservation and Recycling 21: 175-
84.

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

