 

Plant Guide

Urban/Recreational: The species can be used both in 
urban and recreational settings for shade and screening.  
 
Ethnobotany: Apple juice is used for liver problems, gout, 
dysentery, and diarrhea.  The fruit is used to dispel gas, 
dissolve mucous, cure flux, and as a tonic for colic 
(Herman et al., 1996). 

Status 
Manchurian crabapple is a plant hardiness zone 2 species 
that originates in northeast Asia.  Please consult the 
PLANTS Web site and your State Department of Natural 
Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., threatened 
or endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland 
indicator values). 

Weediness 
Manchurian crabapple may become weedy or invasive in 
some regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed.  The fruit is highly 
edible by birds and mammals, and seed may be spread 
locally.  Plants are not rhizomatous.  Please consult with 
your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension 
Service office, state natural resource, or state agriculture 
department regarding its status and use.  Weed 
information is also available from the PLANTS Web site 
at http://plants.usda.gov/.  Please consult the Related Web 
Sites on the Plant Profile for this species for further 
information. 

Description 
Manchurian crabapple is a small, non-suckering, bushy 
tree with many showy, white petals. The small fruit is 
edible by wildlife.  Manchurian crabapple needs well-
drained, moist soils. It is a hardy, spring- flowering tree 
that has played a big part in the development of many 
new crabapple varieties (Knowles, 1995).  
 
The buds are small, ⅛ to ¼ inch, alternate, and reddish-
brown, with imbricate scales.  The leaves are simple, 
ovate to elliptical-oblong with finely serrated edges.  The 
leaf surface is smooth or pubescent.  Leaves are 1½ to 3¼ 
inches long and 1 to 2½ inches wide.  They are dark or 
olive-green above and paler green below.  The leaves turn 
yellow in the fall.  The flower is an umbel with white 
blossoms.  The fruit is a pome, and generally smaller than 
½ inch (Herman et al., 1996).  It has a tendency toward 
pendulous branches with rather narrow leaves, slender 
branches, and bright red fruit (Bourdo, 1999). 
 
It has a form that ranges from spreading to densely 
globose.  It reached a height of 20 feet and a width of 20 
feet in 20 years on a well-drained loam soil in east-central 

MANCHURIAN 
CRABAPPLE 

Malus mandshurica (Maxim.) 

Kom. 

Plant Symbol = MAMA37 

Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Bismarck, North Dakota 

 

Photo Credit: USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, Bismarck, 
North Dakota 

Alternate Names 
Common Alternate Names: None 
Scientific Alternate Names: Malus mandshurica (Maxim.) 
Kom. var. sachalinenis (Juz.) Ponamar; Malus bacata (L.) 
Borkh. ssp. mandshurica (Maxim.) C.K. Schneid. 

Uses 
Conservation/Windbreaks: Manchurian crabapple can be 
used in single or multiple row windbreaks.  Its dense 
branches provide wind and snow protection for 
farmsteads and cropland. 
 
Wildlife: This species provides cover and habitat for 
wildlife. Manchurian crabapple is rated excellent as a 
food supply for wintering wildlife (Henderson, 1987).The 
fruit is a small apple generally less than ½ inch in 
diameter that that can “raisin” on the tree and provide a 
winter food source for many birds and mammals.   
 
Agroforestry Products: The wood is used in smoking 
meats and makes excellent quality firewood.  Fruit can be 
used fresh, dried, or processed into juices, jellies, sauces, 
pies, cakes, and cider. 
 

 

South Dakota (Knudson, 2004).  The bark is gray to 
reddish-brown.  It has a spreading, fibrous root system. 
 
Distribution 
Manchurian crabapple is native to northeast Asia.  For 
current distribution in North America, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 

Adaptation 
The species is cold hardy and moderately drought 
tolerant.  It is adapted to a variety of soils, but prefers 
heavier loam.  It prefers moist, but well-drained sites in 
full sun.  It tends to become chlorotic with higher pH. 

Establishment  
Deer and rabbits often browse young plants.  Planting 
should be done in the early spring when moisture 
conditions are best.  Weed control helps establishment 
and growth rate.  Irrigation may be needed to ensure early 
survival on dry sites. 

Management 
Conservation grade seedlings are usually 2 years old and 
1-2 feet tall.  Manchurian crabapple is a small tree that 
should be planted in the spring 6 to 10 feet apart.  
Seedlings grow medium fast.  Dry conditions may cause 
die-back.  Irrigation may be needed to ensure survival on 
drier sites.  If animal populations are high, the trees 
should be protected from browse and girdling, especially 
in grassy areas (Knudson, 1984).  Pruning should be done 
during dormancy.  Manchurian crabapples are intolerant 
of poorly drained soil and are best planted on a soil of 
medium fertility.  They should be planted in full sun.  
Shade will lessen the quality and quantity of flowers 
(Eisel, 1997). 

Pests and Potential Problems 
Susceptibility of the various varieties to bacterial 
fireblight (Erwinia amylorora) disease varies from 
susceptible to highly resistant, so caution is advised 
(Knowles, 1995). Other diseases typical of the Malus 
species include apple scab (Venturia inaequalis) and 
anthracnose canker (Pezinula malicorticus).  Crabapples 
should not be planted with cedar or juniper trees because 
of the problem with cedar-apple rust (Gymnsporangium 
juniperi-virginianae).  The leaves contain an anti-
bacterial substance called phloretin, which may provide 
variable resistance to bacterial diseases.  Insect pests 
include fall cankerworms (Alsophila pometaria), fall 
webworms (Hyphantria cunea), and apple maggot 
(Rhagoletis pomonella) (Herman et al., 1996). 

Environmental Concerns 
The fruit is a pea-sized apple, highly desirable by birds 
and small mammals.  It is spread locally by these animals.  
Manchurian crabapple is not aggressive, and invasiveness 
is not usually a concern.  Fire and herbicide can be used 
for control. 

 

 

 

The small apples are eaten by many species of birds. (Photo credit:  
D. Tober, USDA NRCS PMC, Bismarck, ND) 

Seeds and Plant Production 
Seed is picked and cleaned in the fall.  It is stratified 
approximately 30 days before planting in the fall.  The 
seed can be mixed with damp, fine sand and kept at 
temperatures of 34 to 36 degrees F.  Growers should 
watch closely the last few days to determine when the 
seeds begin to sprout and break dormancy.  Seed is 
planted approximately ½ inch deep in beds or rows and 
mulched lightly with the surface kept moist until the 
seedling emerges.  Planting stock should be 
approximately 12-24 inches tall. 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
‘Midwest’ Manchurian crabapple was developed by the 
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center at Bismarck, North 
Dakota.  It is grown from open pollinated seed and 
recommended for use in windbreaks and for wildlife 
plantings.  It was selected for its good seedling vigor and 
growth rates. 

References 
Bourdo Jr., E., 1999. The illustrated book of trees.  Pub. 

by Salamander Books Limited, London.  

Eisel, M. 1997. Trees, shrubs, and vines for Minnesota 

landscapes. University of Minnesota Extension WW-
00545, St. Paul, Minnesota. 

Henderson, C. 1987. Landscaping for wildlife.  Minnesota 
Dept. of Natural Resources.  Minnesota’s Bookstore, 
St. Paul, Minnesota. 

Herman, D.E., C. Stange, V. Quam. 1996. North Dakota 

tree handbook. USDA NRCS; ND State Soil 
Conservation Committee; NDSU Extension and 
Western Area Power Admin., Bismarck, North 
Dakota. 

Knowles H., 1996. Woody ornamentals for the prairies. 

University of Alberta, Faculty of Extension, 
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. 

Knudson M., 1984. Midwest Manchurian crabapple 
release brochure.  USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Bismarck, North Dakota. 

Knudson, M. 2004. Twenty-five years of tree planting 
trials at the Highmore field evaluation planting.  
Tech. Rep., USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Bismarck, North Dakota. 

Prepared By:  
Dwight A. Tober (retired) 
USDA NRCS, Plant Materials Center,  
Bismarck, North Dakota 

Citation 
Tober, D. 2013. Manchurian crabapple (Malus 
mandshurica). USDA-Natural Resources Conservation 
Service, Plant Materials Center, Bismarck, ND. 

Published June 2013 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

