 
 

 

Plant Guide

Description 
General:  Pink pappusgrass is a native, warm-season, 
perennial bunch grass with a height of 2 to 5 feet tall.  The 
leaf blade is flat, narrow up to 10 inches long with edges 
that may roll inward.  The seedhead is 4 to 8 inches long, 
narrow, tightly contracted but sometimes with erect 
spreading branches.  Pink pappusgrass, as its name 
implies, has a pink or purplish tinge at maturity (Gould, 
1975).     
 
Distribution:  For current distribution, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  It is found in Texas, New Mexico, and Arizona. 
 
Habitat:   Pink pappusgrass is found in the dry rangelands 
of Texas to Arizona with annual rainfall of 10 to 20 
inches.  It is located on a wide variety of range sites 
including gray sandy loam, clayloam, and saline clay.  It 
is associated with Arizona cottontop, false Rhodes grass, 
alkali sacaton, plains bristlegrass, and curly-mesquite. 
Pink and whiplash pappusgrass have considerable overlap 
in range and habit, and often grow together (Reeder, 
2008). 
 
Adaptation 
Pink pappusgrass grows well on most soil types, 
including sandy loam, clay, clay loam and saline clay 
soils 
 
Establishment 
Seedbed preparation should begin well in advance of 
planting.  Planting can be scheduled for early spring or 
where there are few cool-season weeds, pink pappusgrass 
can be planted in the late summer.  In Arizona and New 
Mexico planting should be timed to catch the summer 
monsoons.  Establish a clean, weed-free seedbed by either 
tillage or herbicides.  Prior to planting, the site should be 
firm and have accumulated soil moisture.   
 
Pink pappusgrass is best seeded using a native-grass drill 
with picker wheels to ensure a good planting of the fluffy 
seed.  Broadcast seeding may be used in areas not easily 
planted with a drill, but some type of additional coverage 
such as culti-packing or light dragging will be beneficial 
to ensure good seed to soil contact.  Seed coatings (talc 
based) can also be used to increase the flowability of the 
fluffy seed through standard seed drills.  
 
Seed should be planted 1/8 to 1/4 inch deep.  It is better to 
plant too shallow than too deep.  For calibration purposes, 
Maverick Germplasm pink pappusgrass contains 
approximately 322,000 uncoated seeds per bulk pound.  A 
seeding rate of 3 pounds of pure live seed (PLS) per acre 
is recommended.  In planting mixtures, reduce the rate 

PINK PAPPUSGRASS 

Pappophorum bicolor 

 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS, E. “Kika” de la Garza 
Plant Materials Center 

E. Fourn. 

Plant Symbol = PABI2 

Forrest Smith, South Texas Natives 

 

Alternate Names 
Pappophorum mucronulatum 
 
Uses 
Pink pappusgrass is useful for upland wildlife plantings, 
highway right-of-ways and ecosystem restoration.  It 
provides fair forage for livestock.  It also may have uses 
in urban landscaping and ornamental plantings.  The 
foliage is a deep green color and seedheads are an 
attractive pink coloration. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status and wetland indicator values). 
 

 

according to the percent of pink pappusgrass in the 
mixture.  
 
Soil analysis should be performed prior to planting to 
determine the necessary levels of nitrogen, phosphorus 
and potassium.  Nitrogen should not be applied until the 
stand is established.  If 1 to 2 plants per square foot have 
become established, than the planting has been successful. 
 
Management 
Pink pappusgrass should not be grazed the first year.  
After a stand is established, either continuous or rotational 
grazing can be used. Contact your local NRCS field office 
for assistance in developing a prescribed grazing plan. 
 
Plants should be allowed to produce seed occasionally to 
insure stand health.  Pink pappusgrass is a long-lived 
perennial that is extremely drought and fire tolerant once 
established.   
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Common pests of pink pappusgrass seed include fall 
armyworms (Spodoptera spp.), thrips (Thrips spp.), and 
rice stink bugs (Oebalus pugnax). Control of pests may be 
necessary in order to produce seed crops in dry years 
under irrigation  
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Seed increase plots have been planted on 36” bedded 
rows, however flat plantings may be possible with 
frequent weeding. Pink pappusgrass can also be 
established with vegetative transplants.  Rapid spread and 
growth has been observed in transplant established stands 
providing seed harvests within the first year.  Furthermore 
transplants stands facilitate better weed control in the seed 
production fields.   
Deep soil tillage or frequent close cultivation is 
recommended to promote seed production.  Commercial 
herbicides are available for weed control once plants are 
beyond the seedling growth stage.  Consult your local 
extension weed specialist for recommended herbicides. 
 
Pink pappusgrass produces seed throughout the year.  
Seed is harvested with a Flail Vac or similar brush-type 
harvester.  The use of slow travel and RPM speeds while 
harvesting results in relatively clean seed, needing little 
cleaning or processing. Debearding of the seed has been 
accomplished through the use of a Westrup brush 
machine. However, do not aggressively debeard the seed 
such that it removes the caryopsis from the glumes as 
seed damage or reductions in seed life have been 
observed.  To clean stems and chaff from harvests, a 
clipper seed cleaner has been used following the 
debearding treatment.  
 

 

On average one should expect to produce 150 bulk 
pounds per harvest of clean seed per acre.  Purity of the 
seed is usually around 55% and germination rates are 
about 40%.  Adequately stored seed in humidity and 
temperature controlled facilities can be expected to stay 
viable for 5 to 10 years. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
Maverick Germplasm pink pappusgrass is a blend of 7 
collections from the Rio Grande Plains of Texas and was 
released by Texas A&M-Kingsville South Texas Native, 
the USDA-NRCS E.”Kika” de la Garza Plant Materials 
Center and Texas AgriLife Research Station in Beeville, 
Texas in 2010.  It was selected for its good seed 
germination and seedling vigor, as well as excellent soil, 
seed viability.  It is predominantly adapted to sandy loam, 
clayloam, and saline clay range sites in south Texas.  
Breeder seed is maintained by South Texas Natives in 
conjunction with Texas Foundation Seed Service. 
 
References 
Gould,  F.W.  1975. The  Grasses  of  Texas.    Texas  A&M 

University Press. College Station, TX. 

Reeder, J.R. 2008.  18.01 PAPPOPHORUM Schreb in 
Manual of Grasses for North America.  Utah State 
University, Logan, UT. 

 
Prepared By 
John Lloyd-Reilley, Manager 
USDA-NRCS, E. “Kika” de la Garza Plant Materials 
Center, Kingsville, Texas 
 
Citation 
Lloyd-Reilley, J.  2010.  Plant guide for whiplash 
pappusgrass (Pappophorum vaginatum). USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, E. “Kika” de la Garza 
Plant Materials Center.  Kingsville, TX.   

Published October, 2010 

Edited: [14Sep2010 sdm] 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 
 
 

 

