 
 

 

Plant Guide

Populations appear to be in decline throughout the 
species’ range of adaptation (Keane and others 2010). 
White pine blister rust (Cronartium ribicola), an 
introduced fungal pathogen, and mountain pine beetle 
(Dendroctonus ponderosae) are the greatest threats to 
this species. Infections continue to kill trees and 
reduce seed sources for reproduction. Climate change 
is also considered a threat to whitebark pine. Species 
not normally adapted to alpine areas at or near 
timberline are likely to spread to higher elevations 
with increases in temperatures. In Canada, the species 
is predicted to decline by 57% by 2100 (COSEWIC, 
2010). 

Fire suppression, resulting in fuel buildup over many 
years followed by high intensity wildfires is a major 
cause of mortality (USDI-FWS, 2011). Additionally, 
fire suppression has led to a shift in plant 
communities and a reduction in open habitat for 
whitebark pine germination. Sites previously subject 
to relatively frequent fires have become dominated 
by shade tolerant species, excluding whitebark pine.  
 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Uses 
Whitebark pine increases biodiversity in alpine 
communities by performing several important roles 
in the alpine ecosystems. As a pioneer species 
whitebark pines stabilize loose soils after disturbance. 
The trees capture snow drifts and create shade which 
slows snowmelt.  
 
Numerous Native American tribes used the seed as a 
food source (Moerman, 1998). 
 
Whitebark pine seeds are eaten by Clark’s 
nutcrackers (Nucifraga columbiana) and other birds 
and mammals. Grizzly bear (Ursus arctos horribilis) 
females, in the Yellowstone ecosystem utilize the 
energy-rich seed of whitebark pine to increase their 
fat reserves prior to hibernation. The seeds are 
comprised of 21% carbohydrates, 21% protein, and 
52% fat, which is significantly more fat than most 
other bear food sources. Female bears consume more 
whitebark pine seeds than males, and female grizzly 
bears that frequently made use of whitebark pine 
seeds reproduced at an earlier age and exhibited 
higher reproductive rates than females who 

WHITEBARK PINE 
Pinus albicaulis Engelm. 

Plant Symbol = PIAL 

 

 
Contributed by:  NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, ID 

Whitebark pine (left). Photo by Mark W. Skinner, PLANTS 
Database,  USDA-NRCS, 2011.  

Alternate Names 
None 
 
Status 
In 2011 the USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 
announced that listing whitebark pine as threatened 
or endangered is warranted. However, higher priority 
actions precluded immediate listing. Whitebark pine 
has been added to the candidate species list (USDI-
FWS, 2011). 
 

 

consumed few pine seeds. The bears obtain seed by 
raiding red squirrel middens (Mattson and others, 
1991). 

 

Clark’s nutcracker. Photo from USDA-FS. 
 
Description 
General:  Pine family (Pinaceae).  Whitebark pine is 
a medium to tall tree with a rounded or irregularly 
spreading canopy. Mature trees reach 5 to 20 m (16 
to 66 ft). Whitebark pine trees are very long-lived. 
The oldest known specimen, over 1,200 years old, 
lives in the Sawtooth National Forest in Idaho 
(Perkins and Swetnam, 1996). In open areas the trees 
tend to be multi-stemmed and spreading, while in 
dense growth they are single-stemmed and upright. 
Above timberline they take on a krummholz (stunted, 
shrub-like) form. Whitebark pine has 5 needles per 
cluster (fascicle), 4 to 8 cm (1.5 to 3 in) long. Mature 
bark is whitish gray, while twigs are yellowish and 
pubescent. Whitebark pine trees are monoecious, 
bearing both male and female cones on the same 
plant. Female cones are dark brown to purplish, 5 to 
8 cm (2 to 3 in) long (Davis, 1952). The seeds are 10 
to 12 mm (0.4 to 0.5 in) long. The cones are 
indehiscent; seeds are not dislodged by wind. The 
seeds are spread almost solely by Clark’s 
nutcrackers, which rip the cones apart, eating some 
and caching the rest. 
 
Distribution:  Whitebark pine trees are found on cold 
wind-swept ridges and peaks in western North 
America. Many stands are geographically isolated. 
Populations occur from the coastal mountain ranges 
of British Columbia, Washington and Oregon, south 
to the Sierra Range of California and east to the 
Rocky Mountains of Idaho, Montana, Wyoming and 
Alberta with scattered populations in the Great Basin. 
For current distribution, consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
Habitat:  Whitebark pine is adapted to steep slopes 
and windy exposures in subalpine and alpine habitats. 
It is often an early to mid-seral species. It grows with 
other cold and wind tolerant alpine trees such as 
lodgepole pine (P. contorta), Englemann spruce 

 

 

(Picea engelmannii), and subaplpine fir (Abies 
lasiocarpa). 
 

Distribution of whitebark pine. Image from the PLANTS 
Database. USDA-NRCS, 2011. 

 

Adaptation 
Whitebark pine is adapted to cold, windy, snowy 
peaks with cool summer conditions. Whitebark pine 
tolerates poor soil conditions of weakly developed 
glacial soils. Precipitation requirements are broad. 
Populations are found in areas receiving 50 to 250 cm 
(20 to 100 in) of annual precipitation (USDI-FWS, 
2011).  

Establishment 
Whitebark pine seeds are distributed almost 
exclusively by Clark’s nutcrackers (Tomback and 
Linhart, 1990). The seeds may be carried several 
miles from the parent tree where the seeds are placed 
in caches for later consumption. Seed not eaten is 
available for germination under favorable conditions. 
Germination often occurs 2 or more years after 
caching. 

Low germination rates are related to the development 
and condition of the embryo and to seed coat factors 
(McCAughy and Schmidt, 1990). Seeds from three 
Canadian sources germinated poorly, despite a 
variety of seed coat scarification techniques with and 
without cold stratification (Pitel and Wang, 1980). 
The best results were obtained when a small cut was 
made in the heavy seed coat and the seed was placed 
adjacent to germination paper to facilitate water 
uptake. The seed coat is evidently a major cause of 
delayed regeneration or seed dormancy. Another 
factor explaining the low germination was the low 
proportion of seeds with fully developed embryos. In 
another test, using seed collected from Idaho, 61 
percent of the seed germinated after clipping of the 
seed coat. Stratification for 60 days plus clipping 
resulted in 91 percent germination. Cold stratification 
for at least 150 days followed by cracking of the seed 

coat has been fairly successful, resulting in 34 
percent germination (Hoff, 1980). 

In areas with long-lasting snow cover , whitebark 
pine trees reproduce by asexual layering. Snow bends 
low flexible branches into the soil. The resulting 
stand is a patch of krummholz trees. 

Management 
Physical management (pruning) of whitepine blister 
rust infected trees has proven labor intensive and 
ineffective. Efforts are being made to develop 
whitebark pine trees with inherited resistance to 
white pine blister rust.  
 
Chemical control options for mountain pine beetle 
are limited. At present, there are no labeled pesticides 
for use on mountain pine beetle Due to high 
elevations and remote locations, seeding, planting 
and restoration efforts are challenging. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
White pine blister rust and mountain pine beetle have 
significantly decreased stands and populations of 
whitebark pine. Mountain pine beetles are native to 
western North America and are a natural component 
in forest disturbance; however occasionally the 
beetles reach epidemic levels causing widespread 
mortality of pine trees.  
 
White pine blister rust is an introduced fungal agent 
(Cronartium ribicola). This rust has affected all of 
the western 5-needle pines causing high rates of 
mortality. In areas of northwestern U.S. and 
southwestern Canada, white pine mortality caused by 
blister rust and mountain pine beetle exceeds 50%. 
Problems relating to white pine blister rust are 
exacerbated as climates become warmer in higher 
elevations due to climate change. The combination of 
these factors (fire suppression, white pine blister rust, 
climate change, and epidemic levels of mountain pine 
beetles) cause federal listing as threatened or 
endangered to be warranted (USDI-FWS, 2011). 
 
Several other pathogens are known to infect 
whitebark pine; however these are not seen as major 
concerns. Stem infections, cankers, wood rots, molds 
and dwarf mistletoe (Arceuthobium spp.) have been 
identified on whitebark pine. 

References 
COSEWIC. 2010. COSEWIC assessment on the 
status of whitebark pine (Pinus albicaulis) in 
Canada. Committee on the Status of Endangered 
Wildlife in Canada. Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. 
54p. 

Davis, R.J. 1952. Flora of Idaho. Brigham Young 

University Press. Provo, Utah. 835p. 

 

 

Hoff, R. J. 1980. Unpublished data on file at: USDA 
Forest Service, Intermountain Forest and Range 
Experiment Station, Forestry Sciences 
Laboratory, Moscow, ID.  

Keane, R.E., Parsons, R.A. 2010. Management guide 
to ecosystem restoration treatments: Whitebark 
pine forests of the northern Rocky Mountains, 
USA. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-232. Fort 
Collins, CO: US Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research 
Station. 133p. 

Mattson, D. J.; Blanchard, B. M.; Knight, R. R. 1991. 
Food habits of Yellowstone grizzly bears, 1977-
1987. Canadian Journal of Zoology. 9:1619-
1629. 

McCaughey, W., and W. Schmidt. 1990. Autecology 
of whitebark pine (Pinus albicaulis Engelm.). In: 
Proceedings-Whitebark pine Ecosystems: 
ecology and management of a high-mountain 
resource. Montana State University, Bozeman, 
MT; 1989 March 29-31. Gen. Tech. Rep. Ogden, 
UT: USDA Forest Service, Intermountain 
Research Station.  

Moerman, D.E. 1998. Native American Ethnobotany. 

Timber Press. 927 p.  

Perkins, D.L. and T.W. Swetnam. 1996. A 

dendroecological assessment of whitebark pine 
in the Sawtooth-Salmon River region, Idaho. 
Canadian Journal of Forest Research 26: 2123-
2133. 

Pitel, J. A., and B. S. P. Wang. 1980. A preliminary 

study of dormancy in Pinus albicaulis seeds. 
Canadian Forestry Service, Bi-monthly Research 
Notes. Jan-Feb: 4-5.  

Tomback, D.F., and Y.B. Linhart. 1990. The 

evolution of bird-dispersed pines. Evolutionary 
Ecology 4: 185-219. 

[USDA NRCS] USDA Natural Resources 

Conservation Service. 2011. The PLANTS 
Database. URL: http://plants.usda.gov (accessed 
Nov. 28, 2011). Baton Rouge (LA): National 
Plant Data Center. 

USDI-Fish and Wildlife Service. 2011. Endangered 

and threatened wildlife and plants; 12-month 
finding on a petition to list Pinus albicaulis as 
endangered or threatened with critical habitat.  
In: Federal Register. 76(138): 42631-42654. 

 
Prepared By 
Derek Tilley, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho 
 
Loren St. John, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho 
 
Dan Ogle, USDA NRCS, Boise, Idaho 
 
 
 
 

and visit the PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant Materials Program 
Web site http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or 
availability of other Web sites. 

 

 

Citation 
Tilley, D., L. St. John, and D. Ogle. 2011. Plant guide 
for whitebark pine (Pinus albicaulis). USDA Natural 
Resources Conservation Service. Aberdeen, ID. 

Published December 2011 
Edited: 19Dec2011djt; 28Nov2011ls; 
30Nov2011dgo; 18Jangm 

For more information about this and other plants, 
please contact your local NRCS field office or 
Conservation District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

