 
 

 

Plant Guide

important feature of claspingleaf pondweed is its 
antibacterial properties. Bushman and Ailstock 
(2006), found claspingleaf pondweed exhibited 
antibacterial activity against a number of different 
strains of bacteria. This could be critical for the 
health of the organisms dwelling in the grass beds 
such as the blue crab, the waterfowl that consume it, 
as well as any plant community dynamics affected by 
this trait. 

Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Description 
General: 
Claspingleaf pondweed is a submerged, rooted, 
flowering aquatic plant that grows in alkaline, 
brackish, and freshwater lakes, streams and estuaries. 
Substrate conditions are often low in organic content 
forming a firm muddy bottom or a sand-based 
sediment in reasonably slow moving waters. The 
plant has a well-developed rhizomatous network 
(horizontally branching roots). At the end of the 
vegetative season rhizomes overwinter in the form of 
resting buds. These buds develop at the tips of 
rhizomes and are the source of the next year’s shoots 
(Hutchinson 1975). Resting bud depth is variable 
from just below the sediment surface to depths of 
more than 8 inches into the sediment. Plants tend to 
be darker green colored in shallow waters and are a 
paler green in deeper water (Bergstrom et al. 2006). 
 
Stems are light beige to reddish brown or green-
yellow in color typically consisting of one straight 
main stem at the base of the plant. Sometimes two or 
three (rarely more) stems may branching from the 
main stem. The parallel-veined leaves are almost 
perfoliate (stem through the leaves), cordate (heart 
shaped) clasping the stem by curving around it. 
 
 Leaves measure 0.4-2.75 inches long and are from 
0.4 to 1 inch wide. They typically start no more than 
about 2 inches from the base of the plant and extend 
regularly along the stem in an alternate or slightly 
opposite pattern.  Leaves extend to either the top of 
the stem or to the flowering end (terminal 
inflorescence) of the plant. Stem densities in the wild 
are highly variable.  Due to its rhizomatous nature, it 
is quite rare to find just a single plant. 
 

CLASPINGLEAF 

PONDWEED 

Potamogeton perfoliatus L. 

Plant Symbol = POPE7 

Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Norman A. Berg 
National Plant Materials Center 

USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database / Britton, N.L., and A. Brown. 
1913. An illustrated flora of the northern United States, Canada 
and the British Possessions. 3 vols. Charles Scribner's Sons, New 
York. Vol. 1: 80. 

 

Alternate Names 
redhead grass 
clasping-leaved pondweed 

Uses 
Claspingleaf pondweed beds stabilize sediments, 
reduce shoreline erosion, and provide valuable 
habitat and food source for a variety of fish, 
macroinvertebrates, crustaceans and waterfowl 
(Thayer et al 1975, Lubbers 1990). They provide 
protection from predators, as well as attracting 
epiphytes and zooplankton upon which other species 
graze, providing an important link in the food web. 
During the breeding season up to 80 percent of 
waterfowl’s diet is plant material, much of it aquatic 
(Kenow and Rusch 1996). Migratory waterfowl dive 
and scavenge for rhizomes buried in sediments of 
claspingleaf pondweed beds.  Another potentially 

 

Flowers are borne on spiked inflorescences (clusters 
of flowers arranged on stems) measuring 
approximately 0.5-1.25 inches in length and about 
0.25-0.50 inches wide (Gleason and Cronquist 1991). 
The number of inflorescences per stem ranges from 
1-3. Each inflorescence contains about 5-12 (four 
carpel) flowers producing 20-48 seeds each, for a 
total of about 48-115 seeds per flowering stem 
(STAC 2007). 
 

Distribution:  

 

Claspinleaf pondweed distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS 
Database. 

For current distribution, please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 

Habitat:  Insert text here 

Adaptation 
Claspingleaf pondweed can be found throughout the 
eastern half of North America, Central America 
(Guatemala), Eurasia, Africa, and Australia 
(Bergstrom et al. 2006). 

Establishment 
Claspingleaf pondweed is propagated through 
cuttings, rootstocks, and seeds. When starting new 
populations, using cuttings and rootstocks is the least 
time consuming method. Cuttings can be taken and 
immediately planted to create new ones. Use of the 
appropriate planting substrate is important. 
Sediments may be removed from a claspingleaf 
pondweed bed in the field or a better solution has 
been to develop a substrate combining oyster shell 
and peat. This combination is easily obtainable from 
nursery and agricultural suppliers, and balances the 
plants’ need for an alkaline substrate and includes a 
coarse addition of organic material (Zinecker et al., 
2007). Zinecker et al. (2007) found that the planting 
substrate should have low organic content, but 

 

 

provide some nutrients, making a sand-only substrate 
a poor choice. A combination of sand and soil is also 
a poor choice due to the high organic content with 
added fertilizers that are much higher than the ideal 
environment. These factors encourage growth in the 
aboveground shoots rather than encouraging a robust 
rootstock. An adequate root system is important 
when propagating plants, in particular for restoration. 
When rootstocks are available for planting directly, 
time is saved because no energy is expended on 
aboveground shoot development until the 
underground parts are more developed. When shoots 
are planted without roots, the shoots typically senesce 
allowing the plants to develop underground biomass.  
This underground system supports the plant 
vegetatively, nutritionally, and provides an anchor 
guarding against currents or storm events.  
 
Seed propagation may result in a much higher yield 
of plants than asexual propagation. Seeds must be 
harvested from plants at the right time of year. 
Germination rates under ideal conditions are variable 
from 16-60% (STAC 2007). Ailstock et al. (STAC 
2007) found reproductive potential and harvest time 
highly correlated. Seed collections occur from late 
July to August at the Baltimore, MD latitude.  Due to 
the large geographic range of this plant the timing of 
harvest will vary with location. Seed harvesting of 
the upper third of the water column includes the plant 
stems and florescence (i.e. 1 foot down in 3 feet of 
water, or 10 inches down in a 30 inch tank).  
Harvested seeds quickly degrade and require cold 
treatment almost immediately. Seed processing 
should occur soon after harvest and before cold 
storage. Best germination results require seed to be 
stratified six to nine months in cold storage (at 40 deg 
F) and submerged in 15 parts per thousand (ppt) 
saline water with aeration. To encourage fast, high 
rates of seed germination, after the 6-9 month 
stratification,transfer the seed to a warm, freshwater 
environment. 
 
Plants in outdoor tank storage may be left for seeds to 
fall near parent plants and allowed to overwinter and 
germinate. This may not result in the highest 
germination success  because the plants are harder to 
monitor and the environment is less controlled. The 
issues affecting germination rates here would be 
inconsistent temperature, lack of aeration, and 
controlled salinity. Seeds from the outdoor tank may 
be collected and put into a climate controlled 
refrigerator with or without aeration and/or salinity. 
If not aerated or place in 15ppt saline water, some 
germination (usually no more than 20%) will occur. 
Seed in cold, dark storage, will germinate within 2 to 
4 months of harvest.  
 
In natural propagation and restoration areas, the 
plants must be protected by exclosure from natural 
predators of the plants, such as crabs or cownose 

rays. There are few prescriptions for the spacing of 
plants. Restoration in the field, is composed of 
propagules typically planted in a grid comprising an 
entire grass bed. Ailstock (2007) recommends 
seeding 16 seeds per sq ft (696,960 seed/acre), while 
restoration plantings of winter bud or individual plant 
densities might be half that number at 5 to 10 units 
per sq. ft. 

Management 
In a domestic tank or experimental setting, one of the 
major concerns in the aquatic environment is 
ensuring that algae or invasive vegetation do not 
overwhelm desired stock plants. Keeping nutrients 
and organic matter low, as well as the use of 
herbivores such as snails, fish or tadpoles will help 
reduce algae. Skimming and removal of algae with 
nets similar to those used cleaning pools will 
removed entrained nutrients and temporarily reduce 
completion. Large tanks with substrate filled bottoms 
may be more difficult to maintain than in tanks where 
plants are grown in removable trays filled with 
substrate.   Greater control of invasive plants can be 
maintained by limiting the spread and eliminating the 
invasive from just one tray rather than a whole tank. 
Aeration of the tanks with a biological or other filter 
can help maintain water quality as well as provide 
aeration for improved growth. Holding tanks may be 
more susceptible to invasion from other plants if they 
are near other holding tanks with other species, or if 
there is a variety of bird life visiting the tanks.  
 
Extensive harvesting or digging in tanks filled with 
sediments also gives invaders the opportunity to 
exploit a disturbed environment. When a tank 
becomes overwhelmed by an invading species the 
substrate may need to be changed completely, 
additional desired plants added to increase density, 
and/or the entire tank replanted.   
 
Herbivory in outdoor tanks from waterfowl, 
particularly Canada geese, may be a problem. It can 
be discouraged with shadecloth or strings criss-
crossed over the top and on the sides of the tanks. 

Pests and Potential Problems 
While there are species of insects that use 
claspingleaf pondweed as part of their life cycle, 
either for egg laying or herbivory in adulthood, most 
of the species native to the areas where these beds are 
found do not seem to have a marked negative effect 
on the plants (Stevenson 1988). Non-migrating 
Canada geese graze extensively on the vegetation. 
Theworst herbivores of submerged aquatic vegetation 
(SAV) are the non-native mute swans and native 
cownose rays. While it is unlikely they will wipe out 
the entire SAV population in a given water body, 
they do reduce above and belowground plant 
material, and they may destroy restoration plantings 
in a single visit.  

 

 

Environmental Concerns 
There are no known issues with respect to 
claspingleaf pondweed and environmental concerns. 
Man made activities such as boating, dredging and 
coastal development pose major challenges to grass 
bed longevity. 

Control 
Mechanized cutting is effective for controlling 
claspingleaf pondweed, and the least harmful to other 
species. 

Seeds and Plant Production 
Claspingleaf pondweed seeds are available through 
wild collection, requiring a permit. Seed weight and 
viability is dependent upon time of collection. Mature 
wild seed per pound can range from 3,839 seeds up to 
11,088 seeds per pound (Ailstock and Shafer 2004). 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
There are no known cultivars, improved, and/or 
selected materials for claspingleaf pondweed.  This 
plant is commercially available from specialized 
coastal and wetland plant nurseries. 

References 
References 
Ailstock S. and D. Schafer. 2004. Restoration  

potential of Ruppia maritime and Potamogeton  
perfoliatus by seed in the Mid-Chesapeake Bay. 
US Army Corps of Engineers Publication  
ERDC/TN EL-04-02. 

Bergstrom, Peter W., Robert F. Murphy, Michael D.  

Naylor, Ryan C. Davis, and Justin T. Reel. 2006. 
Underwater grasses in Chesapeake Bay and Mid-
Atlantic coastal waters: guide to identifying 
submerged aquatic vegetation. Maryland Sea Grant 
Publication Number UM-SG-PI-2006-01. College 
Park, MD. 

Bushman, Paul J. and M. Stephen Ailstock. 2006.  

Antibacterial compounds in estuarine  
submersed aquatic plants. Journal of Experimental 
Marine Biology and Ecology. Vol. 331. Pp 41-50. 

Gleason, Henry A. and Arthur Cronquist. 1993.  

Manual of Vascular Plants of Northeastern  
United States and Adjacent Canada. Second 
Edition. New York Botanical Garden.  

Hutchinson, Evelyn G. 1975. A Treatise on  

Limnology. Volume III. John Wiley and Sons. 
New York, London, Sydney. 

Kenow, Kevin P. and Donald H. Rusch. 1996. Food  

Habits of Redheads at the Horicon Marsh, 
Wisconsin. J. Field Ornithol. Vol. 67 Issue 4. Pp. 
649-659.   

Lubbers, L., W.R. Boynton, and W.M. Kemp. 1990.  

Variations in structure of estuarine fish 
communities in relation to abundance of submersed 
vascular plants. Marine Ecology Progress Series. 
Vol. 65, No. 1. Pp. 1-14. 

STAC. 2007. Submerged Aquatic Vegetation (SAV)  

 

Reproductive Ecology in the Chesapeake Bay: 
Evaluating the State of the Knowledge and 
Assessing Future Research Needs. Report of the 
STAC Workshop March 6-7, 2007. STAC 
Publication 07-006.  

Stevenson, J. C. 1988. Comparative ecology of  
submersed grass beds in freshwater, estuarine,  
and marine environments. Limnological 
Oceanography. Vol. 33, No. 4 part 2. Pp 867-893. 

Thayer, G.W., S.M Adams, and M.W. LaCroix.  

1975. Structural and functional aspects of a 
recently established Zostera marina community, p. 
518-540. In L.E. Cronin (ed.), Estuarine Research. 
Academic, New York. 

Zinecker, E., S. Hunter, P. Kangas, J. Englert. 2007.  

Growth of Potamogeton perfoliatus (L.) on 
different substrates. Conference Presentation, ERF, 
Providence, RI. November 2007. 

 
Prepared By: 
Elizabeth Zinecker, PhD candiadate, University of 
Maryland 
 
Jeremy West, Manager, Norman A. Berg National 
Plant Materials Center 

Citation 
Zinecker, E and J. West.  2010.  Plant guide for 
claspingleaf pondweed (Potamogaton perfoliatus L.).  
USDA-Natural Resources Conservation Service, 
National Plant Materials Center.  Beltsville,MD  
20705. 

Published January, 2011 
Edited: 1SEPTEMBER2010JW 
 
For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or Conservation District 
<http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/>, and visit the PLANTS Web 
site <http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials Program 
Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

