 

 

Plant Guide

Alternate Names for Multilobed groundsel 
Lobeleaf groundsel 
Senecio multilobatus 
 
Alternate Names for Rocky Mountain groundsel 
Rocky Mountain butterweed, cutleaf groundsel 
Packera cymbalarioides, P. oodes, Senecio acutidens, S. 
adamsii, S. cymbalarioides, S. fulgens, S. jonesii, S. 
laetiflorus, S. leonardii, S. longipetiolatus, S. oodes, S. 
pammelii, S. platylobus, S. rubricaulis, S. 
streptanthifolius, S. subcuneatus, S. suksdorfii, S. wardii 

Uses 
Multilobed groundsel has been used in restoration and 
wildlife enhancement plantings. The flowers attract a 
variety of native bees. It has been used medicinally by 
Native Americans as an aid for a variety of internal 
problems (Moerman 1998). 
 
Multilobed groundsel and Rocky Mountain groundsel 
contain pyrrolizidine alkaloids (Tilley and St. John 2011), 
and presents a risk to livestock in sufficient quantities 
(Talcott 2003). 

Status 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State Department 
of Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values). 

Description 
General:  Multilobed groundsel is a short-lived perennial 
forb in the sunflower family (Asteraceae) arising from a 
taproot. The plants grow to approximately 10 to 60 cm (4 
to 24 in) tall from a cluster of basal leaves. The leaves are 
2 to 12 cm (1 to 5 in) long, obovate in outline with 
pinnatifid (multilobed) margins. The stem leaves are 
much smaller than the basal leaves. The flower head has 7 
to 13 yellow ray flowers, 4 to 10 mm (0.16 to 0.4 in) long 
and yellow-orange disk flowers. The achenes bear a white 
pappus of capillary bristles (Welsh and others 2003). 
There are approximately 900,000 seeds/lb. 
 
Rocky Mountain groundsel is similar in appearance to 
multilobed groundsel but lacks the deeply cleft leaves. It 
also tends to have a more fibrous root system than the 
taprooted multilobed groundsel. The leaves are relatively 
thick and firm and somewhat succulent. The species is 
highly variable morphologically as evidenced by the 
numerous named taxa. Hybrids between Rocky Mountain 
groundsel and multilobed groundsel are common 
(Cronquist et al 1994). 
 

MULTILOBED 
GROUNDSEL 

Packera multilobata (Torr. & A. 
Gray ex A. Gray) W.A. Weber & 

A. Löve 

Plant Symbol = PAMU11 

And 

 

 

Rocky Mountain 

Groundsel 

P. streptanthifolia (Greene) W.A. 

Weber & Á. Löve 
Plant Symbol = PAST10 

Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Aberdeen, Idaho Plant 
Materials Center 

Multilobed groundsel. Photo by Derek Tilley, USDA-NRCS 

 

 

Distribution:  Multilobed groundsel occurs in arid 
environments from California east of the Sierras to 
Colorado, Wyoming and New Mexico. Rocky Mountain 
groundsel occurs from Alaska to California and east to 
Manitoba and south to New Mexico. For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Habitat:  Multilobed and Rocky Mountain groundsel 
grow naturally in a variety of plant communities and 
elevations. They are often associated with sagebrush and 
pinyon-juniper plant communities, but can also be found 
in desert shrub, mountain brush, ponderosa pine, aspen, 
lodgepole pine and spruce-fir communities (Welsh and 
others 2003). 

Adaptation 
Multilobed groundsel is adapted to growing on medium to 
coarse textured soils. It can be found in arid environments 
to temperate mountain communities in areas receiving 9 
to more than 20 inches of annual precipitation. It is most 
commonly found in open areas but can also be an 
understory species in mountain plant communities. 
Adaptation information for Rocky Mountain groundsel is 
unavailable, but is presumably similar to that of 
multilobed groundsel. 

Establishment 
The full stand seeding rate, based on 50 pure live seeds 
(PLS) per foot at 12 inch spacing, is 2 lbs/acre. When 
planted in a mixture, the seeding rate should be adjusted 
according to the proportion of the mix.  

Management 
Multilobed and Rocky Mountain groundsel should be 
used as a minor components in a plant community.  
Management strategies should be based on the key 
species in the established plant community.  Grazing 
should be deferred on seeded lands for at least two 
growing seasons to allow for full stand establishment. 

Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no known pests associated with these species. 
Groundsels contain compounds toxic to cattle and other 
livestock, but will be avoided when other preferable 
forage is available. 

Environmental Concerns 
Multilobed and Rocky Mountain groundsel are native to 
western North America. There are no known 
environmental concerns associated with this species. The 
toxic compounds found in these species pose a threat to 
grazing animals if consumed in sufficient quantities.    

Seeds and Plant Production 
Wildland collections can be made by hand stripping or 
shaking ripe seed into collection bags. Seed can be 
collected slightly early before complete ripeness by 
harvesting the entire inflorescence and allowing the seed 
to continue ripening while drying. 

 

 

 
The most effective means of processing seed is to use a 
laboratory brush machine with a number 7 mantle at a 
speed of 2. The gate is left approximately 1 cm open to 
allow the brushed seed to fall through to the catch pan 
below. The brushes dislodge the seed from the heads and 
remove the pappus. The brushed material is then cleaned 
using a multi-deck air screen cleaner with a 1.55 mm top 
screen, blank middle, and solid bottom screen. The air is 
set at approximately 1.5 to pick up the removed pappus, 
unfilled achenes and light inert matter. These methods 
yield high purities (90-100%). Seed is stored in cool-dry 
conditions with temperatures of approximately 10° C (50° 
F) and relative humidity of 20 to 30%. 
 
Seed may be sown into weed barrier fabric at 23 to 30 cm 
(9 to 12 in) spacing. Seed should be planted in late fall 
into slightly roughened soil and then lightly covered and 
packed. First emergence occurs in early spring; late April 
and early May at Aberdeen, Idaho.  
 
Seed can be harvested the first full growing season. Two 
to three years of additional harvests may be possible 
depending on ecotype. Plants go dormant in late summer 
and can be mowed for the winter. Seed can be harvested 
from production fields by hand, combine, flailvac, or 
vacuum-type harvester. The Aberdeen Plant Materials 
Center uses a “jet harvester” (Bair and Tilley 2010) with 
the fan running at 3,000 to 5,000 rpm. This ensures that 
only ripe seed is harvested and allows for multiple 
harvests during the season. Seed readily disarticulates 
from flower heads when ripe.   

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
There are currently no commercial releases of multilobed 
groundsel or Rocky Mountain groundsel. 
 
The Aberdeen Plant Materials Center recently cooperated 
with the USDA-Agricultural Research Service, Poisonous 
Plants Laboratory to evaluate a number of Senecio and 
Packera species including multilobed and Rocky 
Mountain groundsel for toxic properties.  Based on the 
findings, the plant materials center discontinued further 
evaluation of Senecio and Packera spp. for potential 
release.   
References 
Bair, C. and D. Tilley. 2010. The Jet Harvester: A New 
Tool for Harvesting Native Forb and Shrub Seed. 
USDA-NRCS. Technical Note 55. Boise, ID. 6p. 

Cronquist, A., Holmgren, A.H., Holmgren, N.H., Reveal, 
J.L., and P.K. Holmgren. 1994. Intermountain Flora: 
Vascular Plants of the Intermountain West, USA. 
Volume 5: Asterales. The New York botanical 
Garden. Bronx, New York. 496p. 

Moerman, D.E. 1998. Native American Ethnobotany. 

Timber Press. 927 p. 

Talcott, P: 2003. Pyrrolizidine Alkaloid Poisoning. In: 

Robinson NE (ed): Current Therapy in Eqine 
Medicine, 5th Edition. Philidelphia, W.B. Saunders 
Co. pp. 788-790. 

Tilley D, St. John L. 2011. Initial toxicity screening of 

groundsel (Senecio spp.); 2011 Progress Report. 
Aberdeen (ID): USDA Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Aberdeen Plant Materials 
Center. 3p. 

USDA-NRCS. 2011. The PLANTS Database [Online]. 

Available at http://plants.usda.gov (accessed 10 
December 2011). USDA-NPDC, Baton Rouge, LA. 

Welsh, S.L., N.D. Atwood, S. Goodrich, and L.C. 

Higgins. 2003. A Utah Flora. Third Edition, revised. 
Brigham Young University, Provo, UT. 

 
Prepared By:   
Derek Tilley, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, ID 
 
Loren St. John, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, ID 

 

Citation 
Tilley, D. and L. St. John. 2012. Plant Guide for 
multilobed groundsel (Packera multilobata) and Rocky 
Mountain groundsel (P. streptanthifolia). USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Aberdeen Plant 
Materials Center. Aberdeen, Idaho 83210. 
 
Published June2012 
 
Edited: 20Dec2011djt; 21Dec2011ls;22Dec2011jab; 06Jun2012djt; 
06June2012ls 
 
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 
PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

