 
 

 

Plant Guide

Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State Department 
of Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General: Cactus family (Cactaceae). San Rafael cactus 
arises from solitary, hemispheric stems. The plants are 4 
to 6 cm tall with spirally arranged tubercles. The spines 
are 2 to 6 mm (0.08 to 0.2 in) long and pale yellowish. 
Flowers are born at the top, are 15 to 25 mm (0.6 to 1.0 
in) across with yellow to peach flowers (Welsh et al 
2003). The plants shrink underground for several months 
during dry or cold seasons, and are only noticeable in 
flower. 
 
Distribution:This rare species is limited in distribution to 
five populations in the San Rafael Swell region of Emery 
County, Utah. Current surveys estimate the total number 
of individuals at about 20,000.  
 
Habitat: San Rafael cactus occurs on Juniper/pinyon and 
salt desert shrub communities on hills, benches and 
flatlands of the Colorado Plateau.  
 
Adaptation 
This species is adapted to limestone gravels, shales, clays 
and silty substrates of the Morrison, Carmel, and 
Moenkopi formations at 1850 to 2050 m (6070 to 6700 
ft). 
 
Management 
San Rafael cactus is highly sought by cactus enthusiasts.  
It is also under threat from ORV use which is popular in 
its native habitat. Additionally, approximately half of the 
species range is covered by oil and gas leases and mining 
claims.  
 
Management goals are focused on the protection of 
habitat from disturbance. These include the prevention of 
plant collection in natural populations, and implementing 
conservation measures to minimize and mitigate land use 
activities (USDI FWS 2007). 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
The cactus borer beetle (Moneilema semipunctatum) is 
known to parasitize San Rafael cactus. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
There are no known environmental concerns associated 
with this species. 
 

 

SAN RAFAEL CACTUS 
Pediocactus despainii S.L. Welsh 

& Goodrich 

Plant Symbol = PEDE17 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Idaho Plant Materials 
Program 
 

 

Figure 1. San Rafael Cactus (Pediocactus despainii). Photo from 
Cactusfriends.com (2010). 

 
Alternate Names 
Despain’s footcactus 
 
Uses 
There are no known human uses associated with San 
Rafael cactus.  
 
Status 
San Rafael cactus was determined endangered and under 
the protection of the Endangered Species Act by the US 
Fish and Wildlife Service in 1987 (USDI FWS 1987). 
Monitoring data show the species to be in decline based 
on a decrease in the number of vegetative individuals 
capable of reproducing. 
 

 

 

Seeds and Plant Production 
Plants of San Rafael cactus are illegally taken by cactus 
collectors and transplanted to pots and gardens. There is 
however no information available on plant production 
from seed. 
 
References 
USDI Fish and Wildlife Service. 1987. Endangered and 

threatened wildlife and plants; determination of 
endangered status for Pediocactus despainii (San 
Rafael Cactus). Federal Register. 52 (179): 34914-
34917. 

USDI Fish and Wildlife Service. 2007. Recovery outline 

for San Rafael Cactus (Pediocactus despainii_ and 
Winkler cactus (Pediocactus winkleri). U.S. Fish and 
Wildlife Service, Salt Lake City, UT. 10 pp. 
Welsh, S.L., N.D. Atwood, S. Goodrich, and L.C. 

Higgins. 2003. A Utah Flora. Third Edition, revised. 
Brigham Young University, Provo, UT. 

 
Prepared By 
Derek Tilley; USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho. 
 
Loren St. John, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho. 
 
Dan Ogle, USDA NRCS State Office, Boise, Idaho. 
 
Citation 
Tilley, D., St. John, L. and D. Ogle. 2010. Plant guide for 
San Rafael cactus (Pediocactus despainii). USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Idaho Plant Materials 
Center. Aberdeen, ID. 
 
Published: November 2010 
 
Edited: 28Jul2010djt; 25Aug2010lsj; 24Aug2010dgo 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

