  

 

Natural Resources Conservation Service  

Plant Guide 

BLUEBUNCH 
WHEATGRASS 
Pseudoroegneria spicata               

 

(Pursh) A. Löve 
Plant Symbol = PSSP6 
Common Names:  Bluebunch wheatgrass 
Scientific Names:  Agropyron spicatum, Elytrigia 
spicata 

 

Description 
General: Grass Family (Poaceae). Bluebunch 
wheatgrass is a perennial native bunchgrass.  
Bluebunch wheatgrass is highly variable and grows to 
1.5 to 4 feet (0.4 to 1.2 m) tall with seed spikes 3 to 8 
inches (76 to 200 mm) long.  The auricles are pointed and semi-clasping to nearly lacking.  Leaves are lax, cauline, flat to in-
rolled, 0.6 to 0.25 inches (4 to 6 mm) wide, and green to blue in color.  The sheath is generally glabrous.  Reproductive stems 
are erect, slender, and sometimes wiry with a wavy rachis.  The lemma awns range from being short to prominent and 
divergent except on the beardless type where the awn is lacking (Hitchcock 1950).  

Distribution:  Bluebunch wheatgrass is common to the northern Great Plains, Northern Rocky Mountains and the 
Intermountain regions of the western United States.  It is a long-lived cool-season native grass with an extensive root system 
with strong tillers.  Bluebunch wheatgrass spreads by seed; in high rainfall zones it may spread by short rhizomes (Anderton 
and Barkworth 2009). For current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 

Adaptation 
Bluebunch wheatgrass does best on medium to coarse-textured soils, but can be found on heavy to medium to coarse-textured 
soils over 10 inches deep including fairly sandy sites.  It can be found on thin, rocky sites and on very steep slopes.  It will 
tolerate weakly saline conditions. It does not grow on highly acidic sites.  It is cold tolerant, moderately shade tolerant, and 
highly fire tolerant (USDA Forest Service 1996).  It is not tolerant of high water tables, poor drainage, and periods of 
extended inundation. 

Uses 
Grazing/rangeland/wildlife: Bluebunch wheatgrass can be used for native hay production and will make nutritious feed, but 
is better suited to grazing use.  Bluebunch wheatgrass is palatable to all classes of livestock and wildlife.  It is preferred 
forage for cattle and horses year-round, but it is considered coarse in summer.   
It is preferred forage for sheep, elk, deer, and antelope in spring.  It is considered desired forage for elk in summer.  It is 
desirable forage for sheep in summer, desirable feed for sheep, elk, deer, and antelope in fall and desirable forage for sheep, 
elk, and deer in winter (Ogle and Brazee 2009).  In spring, the protein levels can be as high as 20 percent decreasing to about 
4 percent protein as the forage matures and cures.  Digestible carbohydrates remain about 45 percent throughout the active 
growth period.   
 
Erosion control/reclamation: Bluebunch wheatgrass is very drought resistant, persistent and adapted to stabilization of 
disturbed soils.  It is very compatible with slower developing native species, such as thickspike wheatgrass (Elymus 
lanceolatus), western wheatgrass (Pascopyrum smithii), and needlegrass species (Achnatherum spp., Nassella spp., and 
Hesperostipa spp.).  It does not compete well with aggressive introduced grasses.  Its drought tolerance, combined with 
extensive root systems and good seedling vigor, make this species ideal for reclamation in areas receiving 10 to 20 inches 
annual precipitation.  'Secar' and ‘Discovery’ compete well in areas as low as 8 inches annual rainfall.  They can be used in 
urban and low water use areas to stabilize ditchbanks, dikes, and roadsides. 

 

Status 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation if not properly 
managed.  Please consult with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service office, state natural resource, or 
state agriculture department regarding its status and use. 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site (http://plants.usda.gov/) and your state’s Department of Natural Resources for this 
plant’s current status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Planting Guidelines 
Planting: This species should be seeded with a drill at a depth of 1/2 inch or less on medium-textured soils, 1/4 inch on fine-
textured soils and 3/4 inch or less on coarse-textured soils.  The single-species seeding rate recommended for this grass is 8 
pounds Pure Live Seed (PLS) per acre or 24 PLS per square foot.  If used as a component of a mix, adjust to percent of mix 
desired.  When broadcast seeding and for mine lands and other harsh critical areas, the seeding rate should be 150 to 200 
percent of the drill rate or 36 to 48 PLS seeds per square foot.  Seedlings are weaker than most introduced wheatgrasses and a 
clean, firm, weed-free seedbed is required for establishment (cheatgrass, medusahead, ventenata and other annual weed 
competition can cause stand failure).  
 
The best seeding results are obtained from seeding in very early spring on heavy to medium-textured soils and in late fall on 
medium to light-textured soils.  Late summer (August - mid September) seeding is not recommended unless irrigation is 
available.  
 
Bluebunch wheatgrass establishes fairly quickly for a native grass and stands should be given 2-3 years to ensure 
establishment.  It is compatible with other native species and should be used in seeding mixtures.  It should not be seeded 
with strongly competitive introduced species. 
 
Bluebunch wheatgrass makes good spring growth, fair summer growth, and good fall regrowth if moisture is available.  
Seedling vigor is fair to good.  
 

Management 
Bluebunch wheatgrass has good palatability to livestock and wildlife.  Established stands do not tolerate heavy continuous 
grazing.  Stands of bluebunch wheatgrass should not be grazed until they are firmly established (usually two growing 
seasons) and have headed out.  Six inches of new growth should be attained in spring before grazing is allowed in established 
stands.  The growing point of bluebunch wheatgrass is fairly high and stands can easily be overgrazed.  It is recommended 
that this grass be grazed under a rest or deferred rotation grazing system to ensure plants remain healthy.  Spring grazing 
should occur no more than one out of three years and no more than 40 percent utilization should occur during rapid growth.  
Heavy early spring grazing is especially damaging and grazing should be delayed until at least mid-boot stage.  No more than 
60 percent utilization should occur after seed ripens.  Once established, bluebunch wheatgrass is competitive with weedy 
species, but it can be crowded out by aggressive introduced species. 
   

Environmental Concerns 
Bluebunch wheatgrass is long-lived and spreads via seed. It can slowly spread vegetatively in precipitation zones above 18 
inches annual rainfall.  It is not considered a "weedy" or invasive species, but can spread into adjoining vegetative 
communities under ideal climatic and environmental conditions. Most seedings do not spread from original plantings.  It is a 
cross-pollinating species and is known to cross with other ecotypes of bluebunch wheatgrass, quackgrass, thickspike 
wheatgrass and bottlebrush squirreltail.  These natural crosses broaden the gene pool and do not dominate a site or crowd out 
the native ecotypes. In many cases the resulting progeny are sterile (Anderton and Barkworth 2009). 

Control 
Stands may require weed control measures during establishment.  Application of 2,4-D should not be made until plants have 
reached the four to six-leaf stage.  Mow weeds at or prior to their bloom stage.  Grasshoppers and other insects may also 
damage new stands and pesticides may be needed. 
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your area and 
how to use it safely.  Always read label and safety instructions for each control method.  Trade names and control measures 
appear in this document only to provide specific information.  USDA NRCS does not guarantee or warranty the products and 
control methods named, and other products may be equally effective. 

Seeds and Plant Production 

 

Seed production of bluebunch wheatgrass has been very successful under cultivated conditions.  Row spacing of 24 to 36 
inches are recommended under irrigation and 36 inches under dryland conditions.  Seeding rates of 3 to 4 PLS per acre are 
recommended.  Cultivation will be needed to maintain rows and weed-free conditions.  Seed fields are productive for three to 
four years.  Average production of 75 to 100 pounds per acre can be expected under dryland conditions.  Average production 
of 150 to 250 pounds per acre can be expected under irrigated conditions.  Harvesting is best completed by swathing, 
followed by combining of the cured rows.  The seed heads readily shatter and require close scrutiny of maturing stands.  If 
direct combined, harvest at 30 percent moisture and dry seed down to 12 percent moisture (if stored in bins) or 15 percent 
moisture (if stored in sacks).  Debearding may be required during processing.  Seed is generally harvested from mid-July to 
mid- August.  

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area of origin)  
Foundation and registered seed is available through the appropriate state Crop Improvement Association or commercial 
sources to grow certified seed.  
 
Bluebunch Wheatgrass Releases 
Anatone Selected Class Germplasm bluebunch wheatgrass (P. spicata spp. spicata) was selected from seed originating near 
Anatone, Washington by the Forest Service Shrub Sciences Laboratory. It was released by the Forest Service Shrub Science 
Laboratory, BLM, Aberdeen Plant Materials Center, Idaho-Utah AES, ARS and the Utah Division of Wildlife Resources in 
2003.  Anatone germplasm establishes rapidly and has the ability to survive and thrive under dry conditions at or above 10 
inches rainfall. It is intended for use on valley and foothill rangelands for re-establishment of native plant communities, 
vegetative firebreaks, and critical area stabilization and reclamation purposes.  Certified seed is available. Generation 1 seed 
is produced by Aberdeen PMC.  
 
'Goldar' bluebunch wheatgrass (P. spicata spp. spicata) was selected from seed collected on Mallery Ridge of the Umatilla 
National Forest in Asotin County, Washington by the Aberdeen Plant Materials Center.  It was released by Idaho-Utah AES, 
ARS and the PMC in 1989.  'Goldar' is noted for rapid establishment, high forage production, and the ability to survive and 
thrive under dry conditions at or above 12 inches rainfall.  It is best adapted for use on higher rainfall foothill and mountain 
rangelands for re-establishment of native plant communities, vegetative firebreaks, and critical area stabilization and 
reclamation purposes.  Certified seed is available and Breeder and Foundation seed is maintained by Aberdeen PMC 
(Alderson and Sharp 1994). 
 
P-7 Selected Germplasm bluebunch wheatgrass (P. spicata spp. spicata) was generated by open- pollinating 25 native 
populations of bluebunch wheatgrass from Idaho, Nevada, Oregon, Utah, Washington and British Columbia resulting in high 
genetic diversity. ARS and the Utah Agricultural Experiment Station released P-7 in 2001. Its full range of adaptation is not 
fully understood, but it is expected to survive and thrive under dry conditions at or above 12 inches rainfall. It is intended for 
use on valley, foothill and mountain rangelands for re-establishment of native plant communities, vegetative firebreaks, and 
critical area stabilization and reclamation purposes. Certified seed is available and Breeder seed is maintained by USDA-
ARS, Logan, Utah.  
 
'Whitmar' beardless wheatgrass (P. spica spp. inermis) is the awnless form of bluebunch wheatgrass. It was selected by 
Pullman PMC from seed native to the Palouse grasslands near Colton, Washington.  Idaho-Oregon-Washington AES and 
Aberdeen-Corvallis-Pullman PMCs released ‘Whitmar’ in 1946.  It performs best above 12 inches rainfall in high winter-low 
summer precipitation areas.  'Whitmar' was selected for forage quality, seedling vigor, and good seed production and is 
intended for use on rangeland for re-establishment of native plant communities and for reclamation.  Certified seed is 
available and Breeder seed is maintained by Pullman PMC (Alderson and Sharp 1994).  
 
‘Columbia’ Germplasm of bluebunch wheatgrass was released by USDA Agricultural Research Service in 2015. It was 
developed through 5 cycles of selection, primarily for increased numbers of spikes, from K68, a population collected in 1980 
in Adams County in eastern Washington. The collection site of K68 averages approximately 250 mm (10 in) of annual 
precipitation, about half of the average annual precipitation at the collection sites of ‘Whitmar,’ ‘Goldar,’ and Anatone 
Germplasm, also in eastern Washington. Columbia Germplasm was compared with other bluebunch wheatgrass plant 
materials at one Nevada, 2 Idaho, and 3 Utah sites in a total of 9 trials, 5 of which were outplanted and 4 of which were 
seeded. Columbia Germplasm is expected to be of use most widely on Intermountain rangelands that receive between 250 
and 350 mm (10in.-13in.) of average annual precipitation (Jones and Mott 2016). 
 
Snake River Wheatgrass Releases  
Snake River wheatgrass (Elymus wawawaiensis) was recently separated out of bluebunch wheatgrass. Several cultivars that 
were released as bluebunch wheatgrass turned out to be Snake River wheatgrass. These are addressed here. More information 
can be found in the Snake River Wheatgrass Plant Guide. 

 

‘Discovery’ Snake River wheatgrass was released in 2008. It was developed from four accessions that were found to have 
improved vigor in comparison to Secar.  These accessions were crossed and seed was harvested in bulk to generate 
Discovery.   Discovery was compared to Secar in seeded trials at two sites in the Intermountain Region and four sites in the 
Great Plains (Jones, 2008). Stand frequency of Discovery in the Intermountain locations for year 2 was 49.3% compared to 
27.4% for Secar.  Forage yield of Discovery for years 2 to 4 was 108.0% greater than Secar.  No significant differences were 
observed at the Great Plains locations.  Discovery was also compared to Secar in a transplanted trial at Millville, Utah where 
it produced 18% greater straw weight across two densities the summer after establishment. The populations used to generate 
Discovery trace to materials collected in Whitman and Asotin counties in southeastern Washington and Idaho County in 
central Idaho.   
 
Breeder seed is maintained by the USDA-ARS Forage and Range Research Laboratory, Logan, UT, and is available to 
growers through the Utah Crop Improvement Association for production of Foundation, Registered, and Certified 
generations.    
 
'Secar' is the first release of Snake River wheatgrass. It was released as a bluebunch wheatgrass, but cytological examination 
later determined it to be Snake River wheatgrass (Carlson and Barkworth 1997).  The collection site for Secar is along the 
Snake River Gorge near Lewiston, Idaho. The Idaho- Oregon- Montana-Wyoming AES, Washington Agriculture Research 
Center, and Pullman Plant Materials Center released Secar in 1980.  It is one of the most drought-tolerant native perennial 
grasses available and can survive down to 8 inches rainfall. It is a bunchgrass with fair to good seedling vigor and establishes 
well under droughty conditions. While Secar is considered to be highly drought tolerant as a mature plant, drought often 
reduces the stand during establishment. 'Secar' is intended for use on rangeland to re-establishment of native-plant 
communities and for cropland retirement plantings.  Certified seed is available and Breeder seed is maintained by Pullman 
PMC. Foundation seed is available through the Washington State Crop Improvement Association (Alderson and Sharp 1994). 
 
Cultivars should be selected based on the local climate, resistance to local pests, and intended use. Consult with your local 
land grant university, local extension or local USDA NRCS office for recommendations on adapted cultivars for use in your 
area. 
 
Literature Cited 
Anderton, L.K. and M.E. Barkworth (Eds.) 2009 Grasses of the Intermountain Region. Intermountain Herbarium p 60. 
Alderson, J. & W.C. Sharp 1994. Grass varieties in the United States.  Agriculture Handbook No. 170. USDA, SCS, 

Washington, D.C. 

Barkworth, M.E., L.K.Anderson, K.M. Capels, S. Long and M.B. Piep. 2007. Manual of grasses for North America. 

Intermountain Herbarium and Utah State University Press, Logan, Utah. 

Carlson, J.R. & M.E.Barkworth 1997.  Elymus wawawaiensis: a species hitherto confused with Pseudoroegneria spicata 

(Triticeae, Poaceae).  Phytologia 83:312-330. 

Cronquist, A., A.H. Holmgren, N.H. Holmgren, J.L. Reveal, & P. K. Holmgren 1977.  Intermountain flora. Vol. 6. The New 

York Botanical Garden. Columbia University Press, New York, New York. 

Jones, T.A., 2008. Notice of Release of Discovery Snake River Wheatgrass. USDA, ARS, Logan, Utah. 7 p. Hitchcock, A. S. 

1950.  Manual of the grasses of the United States.  USDA, Washington, DC. 

Jones, T.A., I.W. Mott. 2016. Notice of release of Columbia germplasm of bluebunch wheatgrass. Native Plants Journal 17 

Miller, R.P., J.M. Seufert, and M.R. Haferkamp.  1987.  The ecology and management of bluebunch wheatgrass (Agropyron 

spicatum): A review.  Oregon Agric. Exp. Sta. Bull. No. 669. 

Ogle, D. and B. Brazee. 2009. Estimating Initial Stocking Rates. Idaho Range Technical Note No. 3. Appendix B.  USDA-

(1): 53-58. 

NRCS. Boise, Idaho. 

Rouge, Louisiana.  

USDA, Forest Service 1996.  Fire effects information system.  Version: 000413. <http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/>.  

Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fire Sciences Laboratory, Missoula, Montana. 

USDA, NRCS 2000.  The PLANTS database. Version: 000413.  <http://plants.usda.gov>.  National Plant Data Center, Baton 

 
 
Citation 
Ogle, D.G., L. St John and T.A. Jones. 2010. Plant guide for bluebunch wheatgrass (Pseudoroegneria spicata). USDA-
Natural Resources Conservation Service. Idaho and Washington Plant Materials Program.Published   
 
 
 

 

Edited: 
Ogle, D.G., L. St John and T.A. Jones. 2010. Plant guide for bluebunch wheatgrass (Pseudoroegneria spicata). USDA-
Natural Resources Conservation Service. Idaho and Washington Plant Materials Program.  

For more information about this and other plants, please contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation District at 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the  
Plant Materials Program Web site: 
http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability of other Web sites. 
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination against its customers, employees, and applicants for 
employment on the bases of race, color, national origin, age, disability, sex, gender identity, religion, reprisal, and where applicable, 
political beliefs, marital status, familial or parental status, sexual orientation, or all or part of an individual's income is derived from 
any public assistance program, or protected genetic information in employment or in any program or activity conducted or 
funded by the Department. (Not all prohibited bases will apply to all programs and/or employment activities.)  
 
If you wish to file an employment complaint, you must contact your agency's EEO Counselor (PDF) within 45 days of the date 
of the alleged discriminatory act, event, or in the case of a personnel action. Additional information can be found online at 
http://www.ascr.usda.gov/complaint_filing_file.html.  
 
If you wish to file a Civil Rights program complaint of discrimination, complete the USDA Program Discrimination Complaint 
Form (PDF), found online at http://www.ascr.usda.gov/complaint_filing_cust.html, or at any USDA office, or call (866) 632-
9992 to request the form. You may also write a letter containing all of the information requested in the form. Send your 
completed complaint form or letter to us by mail at U.S. Department of Agriculture, Director, Office of Adjudication, 1400 
Independence Avenue, S.W., Washington, D.C. 20250-9410, by fax (202) 690-7442 or email at program.intake@usda.gov.  
Individuals who are deaf, hard of hearing or have speech disabilities and you wish to file either an EEO or program complaint 
please contact USDA through the Federal Relay Service at (800) 877-8339 or (800) 845-6136 (in Spanish).  
 
Persons with disabilities who wish to file a program complaint, please see information above on how to contact us by mail directly 
or by email. If you require alternative means of communication for program information (e.g., Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) 
please contact USDA's TARGET Center at (202) 720-2600 (voice and TDD).  
 
For any other information dealing with Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) issues, persons should either contact 
the USDA SNAP Hotline Number at (800) 221-5689, which is also in Spanish or call the State Information/Hotline Numbers.  
For any other information not pertaining to civil rights, please refer to the listing of the USDA Agencies and Offices for specific 
agency information. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Helping People Help the Land 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

