 
 

 

Plant Guide

bees (Bombus spp.), mason bees (Osmia spp.) and 
Andrena spp (Cane, 2011).   

Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Description 
General:  Figwort family (Scrophulariaceae). Blue 
penstemon is a native perennial sub-shrub with several 
stems arising from a branched woody caudex. At maturity 
the plant reaches 30 to 70 cm (12 to 28 in) tall. The basal 
leaves are clustered near the base and are approximately 
15 cm (6 in) long and 2.5 cm (1 in) wide and petiolate. 
The stem leaves are smaller, approximately 11 cm (4 in) 
long and sessile to clasping. The inflorescence is a loose 
spike of flowers born in the upper leaf axils. The flowers 
are bright blue often suffused with pink, 2.5 to 3.5 cm (1 
to 1.5 in) long and about 1 cm (0.5 in) wide at the mouth 
(Hitchcock and others, 1959). The seeds are 
approximately 2 mm (0.08 in) long.  
 
There are wide discrepancies between seed counts 
available for the species. Winslow (2011) obtained seed 
counts from 5 seed lots from wildland collections made in 
Yellowstone National Park. The average for these lots 
was 13,000,000 seeds/kg (5,900,000 seeds/lb), while 
Lambert (2005) lists 396,000 seeds/kg (180,000 seeds/lb). 
The USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research 
Station reported 1,760,000 seeds/kg (800,000 seeds/lb) 
from agriculturally produced seed.  

 

Distribution: Blue penstemon occurs naturally throughout 
most of Idaho and in northwestern Wyoming and 
southwestern Montana.  For current distribution, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 

Habitat:  This species grows in open dry areas on 
sagebrush slopes at moderate elevations and in higher 
plains (Davis, 1952). 

Adaptation 
Blue penstemon is adapted to well-drained, coarse soils in 
areas receiving 40 to 65 cm (16 to 25 in) of annual 
precipitation (University of Wyoming, 2011). Because 
blue penstemon is found in regions with long winter 
snowpack, the seed is highly dormant. Chilling periods of 
less than 24 weeks have little response in overcoming 
seed dormancy (Meyer and Kitchen 1994).  
 

BLUE PENSTEMON 
Penstemon cyaneus Pennell 

Plant Symbol = PECY3 

Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho 

Figure 1. Blue penstemon. Clint Shock, OSU Malheur Experiment 
Station 
 
Alternate Names 
Dark blue penstemon 

Uses 
Blue penstemon is suited for use in restoration and 
wildlife enhancement plantings.  It is not noted for having 
value as forage for livestock, and forage use is limited by 
big game. The fibrous root system and wide canopy cover 
make it a good plant for low-water use landscaping (i.e. 
roadsides) and other ornamental plantings. 
 
Blue penstemon’s large showy flowers attract pollinators 
and other insects which provide a food source for birds 
and other animals. Blue penstemon is known to attract 
several species of native pollinators including bumble 

 

Establishment 
The full stand seeding rate, based on 50 pure live seeds 
(PLS) per foot at 30 cm (12 in) spacing, is 6 kg/ac (3 
lbs/ac). When planted in a mixture, the seeding rate 
should be adjusted according to the proportion of blue 
penstemon in the mix. Blue penstemon has high levels of 
seed dormancy. This species should be seeded in late fall 
as a dormant seeding to allow for natural over-winter 
stratification. 

Management 
Blue penstemon should be used as a minor component of 
seed mixtures.  Management strategies should be based 
on the key species in the established plant community.  
Grazing should be deferred on seeded lands for at least 
two growing seasons to allow for full stand establishment 
(Ogle and others, 2011). 

Pests and Potential Problems 
Blue penstemon is very susceptible to root rot infections 
(Skinner, 2011). Root rot can be prevented by limiting 
irrigation.  

Environmental Concerns 
Blue penstemon is native to the Intermountain Western 
region of the United States. There are no known 
environmental concerns associated with this species. 

Seeds and Plant Production 
Field plantings should be conducted in late fall for natural 
stratification. In greenhouse plant production, treatment of 
seed with gibberellic acid (GA3) may reduce the 
stratification requirement (Kitchen and Meyer, 1991).   
 
The seed bed should be well firmed and weed free. Seed 
increase fields can be planted at 2 kg/ac (1 lb/ac), 25 to 30 
PLS per linear foot with 56 to 91 cm (22 to36 in) row 
spacing for between row cultivation. Seed can also be 
sown into holes cut or burned into weed-barrier fabric. 
The seed is very small; adding a dilutent such as rice hulls 
or cracked grain can provide more accurate seed flow 
through planting equipment. 
 
Seed fields should be irrigated as necessary to maintain 
adequate soil moisture and to prevent crusting. However 
overwatering can cause root rot infections. No overhead 
irrigation should be applied during pollination. Fertilizer 
should not be added the first year, as this will benefit 
weeds more than the crop species. In subsequent years 
fertilizer is applied at 100 lbs actual N and 40 lbs actual 
P/acre in mid-September (Winslow, 2002). 
 
Weed control is done primarily via hand roguing. Grass 
weeds can be controlled with a grass selective herbicide. 
Additional weed control can be achieved by spraying 
glyphosate after the penstemon plants have gone dormant 
in late summer or prior to greenup in the spring. Always 
read and follow label directions when applying pesticides. 
 

 

 

Blue penstemon takes two full growing seasons to 
establish. Seed productions fields will produce for 
approximately 3 growing seasons. 
 
Seed is harvested in late July to early August before 
capsules have shattered. The seed can be hand harvested 
or cut into windrows and harvested with a combine 
(Skinner, 2011). Collected seed should be dried 
thoroughly prior to processing. Thresh capsules with a 
hammermill and then clean with a screen cleaner with 
light air. Seed will keep in storage under low temperatures 
and low humidity for 5 to 7 years (Winslow, 2002). 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
Common wildland collected seed is available from 
commercial sources. There are currently no commercial 
releases of blue penstemon. 
 
References 
Cane, J. 2011. Personal communication. Logan (UT) 

USDA-Agricultural Research Service, Bee 
Systematics and Biology Laboratory. 

Davis, R.J. 1952. Flora of Idaho. Brigham Young 

University Press. Provo, Utah.836p. 

Hitchcock, C.L., Cronquist, A., Ownbey, M., and J.W. 

Thompson. 1959. Vascular Plants of the Pacific 
Northwest. Part 4: Ericaceae through 
Campanulaceae. University of Washington Press. 
Seattle, Washington. 510p. 

Kitchen, S.G. and S.E. Meyer. 1991. Seed germination of 

Intermountain penstemons as influenced by 
stratification and GA3 treatments. J. Environ. Hort. 
9(1): 51-56. 

Lambert, S. 2005. Guidebook to the seeds of native and 

non-native grasses, forbs and shrubs of the Great 
Basin. Boise (ID): USDI-Bureau of Land 
Management. 136p. 

Meyer, S.E. and S.G. Kitchen. 1994. Habitat-correlated 
variation in seed germination response to chilling in 
Penstemon section glabri (scrophulariaceae). Am. 
Midl. Nat. 132: 349-365. 

Ogle, D., St. John, L.,. Stannard, M. and L. Holzworth. 

2011. Technical Note 24: Conservation plant species 
for the Intermountain West. USDA-NRCS, Boise, 
ID-Salt Lake City, UT-Spokane, WA. ID-TN 24. 
57p. 

Skinner, J. 2011. Personal communication. New 
Plymouth (ID): Skinner Seed Farm. Owner. 

University of Wyoming. 2011. Native Plants for the 

Intermountain West. URL: 
http://www.uwyo.edu/wera1013/plantlist_penstemon
cyaneus.asp (accessed 19 December 2011). Laramie 
(WY): University of Wyoming. College of 
Agriculture and Natural Resources. 

Winslow, S.R. 2002. Propagation protocol for production 
of Penstemon cyaneus seeds; USDA NRCS - Bridger 
Plant Materials Center, Bridger, Montana. In: Native 
Plant Network. URL: 

Winslow, S.R. 2011. Personal communication. Bridger 

(MT). USDA-NRCS. Bridger Plant Materials Center. 
Agronomist. 

http://www.nativeplantnetwork.org (accessed 15 
December 2011). Moscow (ID): University of Idaho, 
College of Natural Resources, Forest Research 
Nursery. 

 
Prepared By: 
Derek Tilley, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, ID 
 
Loren St. John, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, ID 
 
Dan Ogle, USDA NRCS Idaho State Office, Boise, ID 
 
Nancy Shaw. USDA-FS. Rocky Mountain Research 
Station. Boise, Idaho. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Citation 
TIlley, D., St. John, L., Ogle, D., and N. Shaw. 2012. 
Plant Guide for blue penstemon (Penstemon cyaneus). 
USDA-Natural Resources Conservation Service, 
Aberdeen Plant Materials Center. Aberdeen, Idaho 83210. 

Published January, 2012 
Edited: 22Dec2011 djt; 4Jan2012ls; 6Jan2012ns; 
14Jan2012gm 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

