  

 

Natural Resources Conservation Service  

 

KLEINGRASS 
Panicum coloratum L. 

Plant Symbol = PACO2 

 USDA-NRCS James E. “Bud” Smith Plant Materials Center (PMC)-
Knox City, Texas 

Alternate Names 
Common Names:  Blue Panicgrass, Klein Grass, 
Klinegrass 

Description 
General:  Kleingrass is a 
warm-season, perennial 
bunchgrass native to Africa 
(USDA NRCS, 2003). It 
begins green up in late 
winter or early spring and 
continues to grow until late 
fall (Alderson and Sharp, 
1994). Plants grow 3 to 4 
feet tall with erect stems 
ranging from 20 to 47 inches 
from a knotty base (Hatch et 
al., 1993). The seed head is a 
fan-shaped, fine-branched 
panicle similar to 
switchgrass. Kleingrass 
reproduces by seed and rhizomes (Gould, 1975). Breeding 
and selection programs have utilized the variability in 
kleingrass germplasm to expand the area of adaptation 
and use in the southern plains (Holt and Conrad, 1966).  
Kleingrass has an average of 500,000 seeds per pound 
(USDA NRCS, 2012b). 

USDA-NRCS/James E. "Bud" 
Smith PMC Knox City, TX 

Distribution:  For current distribution, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 

Plant Guide 

Adaptation 
Kleingrass is adapted to a variety of soils and 
environments. It will thrive on heavy soils, under dry or 
wet conditions, shallow sandy soils, and river bottom 
clays. It is also successful on sites with deep sands and 
medium textured soils (Holt et al., 1968). Kleingrass is 
also drought hardy and tolerates moderate salinity 
(Alderson and Sharp, 1994). It will produce optimum 
forage in areas receiving 18-30 inches of annual 
precipitation or under irrigation management. 

Uses 
Livestock: 
Kleingrass provides excellent forage for livestock. It is 
commonly used as a forage or hay for cattle. The plant 
produces an abundance of high quality forage. Forage 
quality research conducted at the James E. “Bud” Smith 
Plant Materials Center found kleingrass produced a crude 
protein level which ranged from 17% in April to 7% in 
November, while digestibility (in vitro dry matter 
digestibility) ranged from near 70% to 53% for the same 
time period. Kleingrass forage yields ranged from 1,500 
lb/acre to approximately 12,500 lb/acre at the end of the 
growing season (USDA NRCS, 2012a). 
Wildlife: 
Kleingrass provides fair grazing for wildlife as well as 
seed for birds and small mammals (Texas A&M, 2014). 
The dense foliage also provides excellent cover for 
nesting birds and small mammals (Alderson and Sharp, 
1994). 
Conservation: 
Kleingrass has many other conservation benefits 
including:  soil stabilization and re-vegetation on depleted 
soils or range conditions. It can also be used to prevent 
soil erosion on embankments, ditches, and other highly 
erodible sites (USDA NRCS, 2012b). 

Status 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation 
if not properly managed.  Please consult with your local 
NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service 
office, state natural resource, or state agriculture 
department regarding its status and use. 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site 
(http://plants.usda.gov/) and your State Department of 
Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values). 

Planting Guidelines 
The full seeding rate for kleingrass is 1.5 pure live seed 
per acre. When planting this as a component of a seed 

 

mixture, the seeding rate should be adjusted to the desired 
percent of the mix. Seed should be placed ¼ to ½ inch 
deep (USDA NRCS, 2012b).  
Seedbed preparation should begin the year prior to spring 
planting to reduce weed problems during the first year of 
establishment. Work the site as necessary during the 
summer or early fall prior to establishment to create a 
firm, weed-free seedbed. Work should be completed in 
the fall to allow time for the soil to settle and accumulate 
moisture. Minimum and no-till operations should use 
herbicide applications to control weeds. 

Management 
Plantings should be well established before livestock 
grazing is permitted. Twelve months grazing deferment 
should give plants enough time to become established. 
Established stands of kleingrass should not be grazed 
lower than 4-6 inches, depending upon the prescribed 
grazing system (USDA NRCS, 2012b). Contact your 
local U.S. Department of Agriculture-NRCS field office 
for assistance in planning and applying prescribed grazing 
plans.  
Soil test should be conducted to determine the amount of 
fertilizer to apply to sustain a medium fertility level. 
Kleingrass responds well to fertilizer applications 
(Alderson and Sharp, 1994). Nitrogen should not be used 
during the establishment year because it will encourage 
weed growth. Consult your local extension weed 
specialist for recommendations on herbicides for 
kleingrass. 

Pests and Potential Problems 
Photosensitization is a disease associated with a 
hypersensitivity of small ruminants such as sheep and 
goats to sunlight (Bridges et al., 1987). The disease has 
been linked to small ruminants grazing Panicum species, 
including Panicum coloratum. Regrowth following 
defoliation or from favorable moisture conditions has 
shown to be more toxic than older or dormant foliage. 
Symptoms include discharges from the eyes and nose and 
sunburn and edema of skin on the muzzle, and must be 
removed immediately from the pasture to avoid death. 
Signs in horses are more difficult to detect (Texas A&M, 
2014). Cattle appear to be unaffected from this toxin. 

Environmental Concerns 
None Known 

Control 
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use it safely.  Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method 

Seeds and Plant Production 
Kleingrass is indeterminate in seed maturity, which means 
seed matures at different times making harvesting a 
challenge. A good time to plan harvests is 5 to 10 days 
after the first seed shattering occurs (Holt et al., 1968). 

Kleingrass is harvested by direct combining, or by 
swathing and windrowing the plant, then combining the 
windrows. Seed can also be harvested with a seed 
stripper. Long-term harvest records at the James E. “Bud” 
Smith Plant Materials Center shows kleingrass produces 
on average about 40 bulk pounds in June and 75 pounds 
in September. The majority of seed is set between May 
and September (Gould, 1978). 

USDA-NRCS James E. "Bud" Smith PMC 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
‘Selection 75’ kleingrass was released in 1969 from the 
USDA-NRCS James E. “Bud” Smith Plant Materials 
Center in Knox City, TX. It was selected at the USDA 
Soil Conservation Service Nursery in San Antonio, Texas 
from a large number of similar African accessions. 
USDA ARS and Texas Agriculture Experiment Station 
released ‘TEM-LD1’ in 1991.  ‘TEM-LD1’ originated 
from a base population of Selection 75 and OKPC-
1germplasm for quick germination. 
USDA ARS released ‘TEM-SR1’ in 1992.  ‘TEM-SR1’ 
was selected for seed shatter resistance. 
‘Verde’ was released from Texas Agriculture Experiment 
Station and the James E. “Bud” Smith Plant Materials 
Center in 1982.  ‘Verde’ was selected for larger seed size 
and improved seedling vigor over ‘Selection 75’ 
kleingrass. 
‘OKPC-1’ was released by the Oklahoma Agriculture 
Experiment Station in 1982.  ‘OKPC-1’ was selected for 
increased cold tolerance. 
Cultivars should be selected based on the local climate, 
resistance to local pests, and intended use. Consult with 

 

 

your local land grant university, local extension or local 
USDA NRCS office for recommendations on adapted 
cultivars for use in your area. 
 
Literature Cited 
Alderson, J. and W.C. Sharp. 1994. Grass varieties in the 

United States. USDA Agr. Handbook 170. p. 190-
191. 

Bridges, C.H., B.J. Camp, C.W. Livingston, and E.M. 
Bailey. 1987. Kleingrass (Panicum coloratum L.) 
Poisioning in Sheep. Vet Pathol 1987 24:525.  

Gould, F.W. 1975. The Grasses of Texas. Texas A&M 

Univ. Press, College Station. p. 452-454. 

Gould, F.W. 1978. Common Texas grasses an illustrated 
guide. Texas A&M Univ. Press, College Station. pp. 
165. 

Hatch, S.L. and J. Pluhar. 1993. Texas Range Plants. 
Texas A&M Univ. Press, College Station. p. 136-
137. 

Holt, E.C., A.C. Novosad, J.N. Pratt. 1968. Kleingrass. 

Texas A&M Univ. Press, College Station. pp2. 

Holt, E.C., and B.E. Conrad. 1966. Kleingrass. Soil and 

Crop Sciences Department, College Station, and 
Coastal Bend Experiment Station, Beeville, TX.  

Texas A&M Extension Service. 2014. Kleingrass 

(Panicum coloratum). Plants of Texas Rangelands. 
Available at: 
http://essmextension.tamu.edu/plants/plant/kleingrass
/. Accessed 31 March 2014. 

USDA, NRCS 2014. The PLANTS database, Version  
3.5 (http://plants.usda.gov) .  National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, LA 70874-4490 USA. 

USDA NRCS 2012a. Technical Note:  Forage Production, 

Nutritive Quality and Growth Patterns of Various 
Warm Season Grasses.  Available at: 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/Internet/FSE_PLANTMA
TERIALS/publications/txpmctn11188.pdf.  
Published May 2012. 

USDA NRCS. 2012b. Release Brochure for Kleingrass, 

(Panicum coloratum L.). Available at: 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/Internet/FSE_PLANTMA
TERIALS/publications/txpmcrb11371.pdf.   
Published August 2012. 

USDA-NRCS James E. "Bud" Smith PMC  

 

Citation 
Carr, B.C. 2014. Plant Guide for Kleingrass (Panicum 
coloratum L.). USDA-Natural Resources Conservation 
Service, James E. “Bud” Smith Plant Materials Center. 
Knox City, TX, 79529. 

April, 2014 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the  
Plant Materials Program Web site: 
http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Helping People Help the Land 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

