 
 

Plant Guide

 

Status 
Wooly groundsel t is listed as an endangered species in 
Minnesota. Gravel mining and overgrazing in wooly 
groundsel t habitat are cited as major threats (Minnesota 
DNR 2012). Please consult the PLANTS Web site and 
your State Department of Natural Resources for this 
plant’s current status (e.g., threatened or endangered 
species, state noxious status, and wetland indicator 
values). 

Description 
General:  Sunflower family (Asteraceae). Wooly 
groundsel is a low growing perennial forb with short 
rhizomes. Mature plants reach 8 to 30 cm (3 to 12 in) in 
height. The stems and leaves are densely wooly giving it a 
grayish appearance. The basal leaves are lanceolate to 
oblanceolate, 1 to 5 cm (0.4 to 2 in) long and 0.3 to 3 cm 
(0.12 to 1.2 in) wide. The margins are entire to minutely 
toothed. The stem leaves reduce in size going upward 
along the stem. In late spring the plants bear 2 to 10 
flower heads with orange disk flowers and 8 to 13 yellow 
ray flowers approximately 5 to 10 mm (0.2 to 0.4 in) in 
length (Welsh et al 2003). The fruit is an achene with a 
pappus of capillary bristles. The seed is wind dispersed 
(Andersen 1993). There are approximately 600,000 seeds 
per pound (USDA NRCS 2012).  

Distribution:  Wooly groundsel is found from Kansas, 
Minnesota and Manitoba westward to the Pacific states 
and south to California, Nevada and Colorado. For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site. 

Habitat:  Wooly groundsel occupies rocky sites in 
mountain shrub, pinyon-juniper, Douglas fir, spruce-fir 
and alpine tundra communities. It can often be found in 
talus slopes and high ridges. 

Adaptation 
Wooly groundsel is adapted to a broad range of soils from 
coarse to fine, but is typically found in sandy to rocky 
areas with a soil pH of 6.5 to 8.5. It can be found in areas 
receiving as little as 200 mm (8 in) annual precipitation 
(USDA NRCS 2012). 

Establishment 
No seed or plant establishment information could be 
located. 
 
Management 
Wooly groundsel can be used as a minor component of 
seed mixtures.  Management strategies should be based 
on the key species in the established plant community.  

WOOLY GROUNDSEL 
Packera cana W.A. Weber & Á. 

Löve 

Plant Symbol = PACA15 

Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Aberdeen Plant Materials 
Center  

Wooly groundsel. Photo from Wildaboutflowers.com. 

Alternate Names 
Senecio cana, S. convallium, S. halii, S. harbourii, S. 
howelii, S. purshianus 
Gray ragwort, Silvery ragwort, wooly ragwort, wooly 
butterweed 

Uses 
Wooly groundsel has value as a food source for insects. 
Nymphalis and Pontia butterflies have been observed 
foraging nectar from wooly groundsel (Ezzeddine and 
Matter 2008).  
 
Wooly groundsel is browsed by pronghorn antelope 
(Kessler et al 1981). It is rated as having medium 
palatability for sheep and low to medium palatability for 
cattle and horses (Hermann 1966). However it is 
considered to have moderate levels of toxicity and may be 
harmful in sufficient quantities (USDA NRCS 2012). 

 

 

 

Grazing should be deferred on seeded lands for at least 
two growing seasons to allow for full stand establishment. 

Pests and Potential Problems 
Many members of the genus Packera and Senecio are 
known to contain toxic alkaloids which can cause liver 
disease in livestock and humans (Burrows and Tyrl 2001). 
Wooly groundsel is a host plant for the aphid species 
Aphis senecionis (Williams 1891). 

Environmental Concerns 
Wooly groundsel is native to western North America. 
There are no known environmental concerns associated 
with this species. The toxic compounds found in these 
species pose a threat to grazing animals if consumed in 
sufficient quantities.   

Seed and Plant Production 
No propagation or seed production information could be 
found for this species. 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
There are currently no commercial releases of wooly 
groundsel. Common seed and greenhouse grown 
materials are available on the commercial market. 
 
The Aberdeen Plant Materials Center cooperated with the 
USDA-Agricultural Research Service, Poisonous Plants 
Laboratory to evaluate a number of Senecio and Packera 
species including wooly groundsel for toxic properties.  
Based on the findings, the plant materials center 
discontinued further evaluation of Senecio and Packera 
spp. for potential release (Tilley and St. John 2011). 
References 
Andersen, M.C. 1993. Diaspore morphology and seed 

dispersal in several wind-dispersed asteraceae. 
American Journal of Botany. 80(5): 487-492. 

Burrows, G.E. and R.J. Tyrl. 2001. Toxic Plants of North 
America. Iowa State University Press. Ames, Iowa. 
1342p. 

Ezzeddine, M. and S.F. Matter. 2008. Nectar flower use 
and electivity by butterflies in sub-alpine meadows. 
Journal of the Lepidopterists’ Society. 62(3): 138-
142. 

Hermann, F.J. 1966. Notes on Western Range Forbs: 
Cruciferae through Compositae. U.S.D.A. Forest 
Service. Agriculture Handbook No. 293.365p. 

 

 

 

 

Kessler, W.B., Kasworm, W.F., and W.L. Bodie. 1981. 
Three methods compared for analysis of pronghorn 
diets. Journal of Wildlife Management. 45(3): 612-
619. 

Minnesota Department of Natural Resources. 2012. Rare 

Species Guide [Online]. Available at 
http://www.dnr.state.mn.us/rsg/index.html (accessed 
6 June 2012).  

Tilley D, and  St. John L. 2011. Initial toxicity screening 
of groundsel (Senecio spp.); 2011 Progress Report. 
Aberdeen (ID): USDA Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Aberdeen Plant Materials 
Center. 3p. 

Welsh, S.L., N.D. Atwood, S. Goodrich, and L.C. 

Higgins. 2003. A Utah Flora. Third Edition, revised. 
Brigham Young University, Provo, UT. 

USDA-NRCS. 2012. The PLANTS Database [Online]. 
Available at http://plants.usda.gov (accessed 5 June 
2012). USDA-NPDC, Baton Rouge, LA. 

Williams, T.A. 1891. Host-plant List of North American 
Aphidae. The Hunter Printing House. Lincoln. NE. 
27p. 

 
Prepared By:   
Derek Tilley, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, ID 
 
Loren St. John, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, ID 

Citation 
Tilley, D.,and L. St. John. 2012. Plant Guide for wooly 
groundsel (Packera cana). USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Aberdeen Plant Materials Center. 
Aberdeen, Idaho 83210. 

Published June 2012 
Edited: 5June2012djt; 6June2012ls 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

