TIMOTHY 

Phleum pratense L. 
Plant Symbol = PHPR3 

Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Idaho State Office 
and Aberdeen, Idaho, Plant Materials Center 

 
 

 

Plant Guide

birdsfoot trefoil, or clover species as it is one of the 
grasses least competitive with legumes. 
 
Erosion control: Timothy can be used with legumes 
and/or other grasses in seed mixtures for cover, filter 
strips, herbaceous buffers, waterways, and other 
critical area applications. It can also be used for 
erosion control on cut- or burned-over forestland.  
Keep in mind that timothy is shallow-rooted and thus 
should not be considered the primary species for 
erosion control plantings. 

 

Wildlife: Timothy is commonly found in wildlife seed 
mixtures for nesting, brood rearing, and escape cover. 

Status 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Weediness 
Timothy is a relatively short-lived, introduced 
perennial grass that grows in stools or clumps. It 
spreads via seed distribution.  It is not considered a 
"weedy" or invasive species, but can spread into 
adjoining vegetative communities under ideal 
climatic and environmental conditions. It is known to 
coexist with native plants.  On favorable sites where 
it is best adapted, it can exist as a monoculture. There 
is no documentation that it crosses with native 
species. It is considered a weed in seed lots in the 
eastern states of Delaware, Maryland, New 
Hampshire, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Virginia and 
West Virginia.  
 
Consult with your local NRCS Field Office, 
Cooperative Extension Service office, state natural 
resource, or state agriculture department regarding its 
status and use.  Weed information is also available 
from the PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/.  
Consult the Related Web Sites on the Plant Profile 
for this species for further information. 

Description 
General: Grass family (Poaceae). Timothy is a 
relatively short-lived, cool-season, introduced 
perennial grass that grows in stools or clumps. It has 
a shallow, compact, and fibrous root system.  It 
grows in erect culms 50 to 100 cm (20 to 40 in) tall. 
Leaves vary in length from a few inches to more than 
a foot and are about 0.6 cm (0.25 in) wide, narrowing 
gently toward the tip. 
 

Timothy (Phleum pretense). James R. Johnson @ USDA-NRCS 
PLANTS Database / USDA NRCS. 1992. Western wetland 
flora: Field office guide to plant species. West Region, 
Sacramento. 
 
Alternate Names 
Herd grass, herd’s grass, meadow cat's-tail, Phleum 
nodosum 

Uses 
Livestock: Timothy is preferred by cattle and horses, 
and timothy hay is a premium feed for horses. Sheep 
utilize timothy during the summer in mountainous 
areas. Timothy is used for pasture and silage, but 
mostly for hay.  It is palatable and nutritious.  It 
makes a first rate companion grass with alfalfa, 

 

 

Seedheads are spike-like and dense, from 5 to 15 cm 
(2 to 6 in) in length and 0.6 cm (0.25 in) in diameter.  
The sheath is split and hairless with overlapping 
margins. 
 
Timothy is different from most grasses in that one or 
occasionally two of the basal internodes of the stem 
swell into a bulb-like growth called a “haplacorm”.  
This characteristic is often used for identification of 
the plant during its early stages of growth. 
 
Timothy resembles the “native” alpine timothy (P. 
alpinum) to some extent. Alpine timothy is usually 
found in alpine meadows and bogs and occasionally 
at medium elevations along the west coast. Alpine 
timothy usually flowers in late July to early August in 
the mountains. The seedheads of alpine timothy are 
much shorter and the plant is also shorter in stature 
than timothy. 
 
Timothy is also confused with meadow foxtail 
(Alopecurus pratensis) and creeping foxtail (A. 
arundinaceus). Meadow and creeping foxtail have 
short twisted awns giving the inflorescence a 
somewhat fuzzy appearance. Timothy is awnless. 
Additionally, cured seed heads of creeping foxtail 
have a dark to somewhat black appearance, while 
cured seed heads of timothy are tan to buff colored. 
 

Alpine timothy 

Timothy 

Creeping 
foxtail 

 

Differences  in  seedhead  morphology  between  alpine  timothy, 
timothy,  and  creeping  foxtail.  Ben  Zamora,  Oregon  State 
University, Range PlantLeaflet No. 47. Seed head examples are 
not to scale. 
 
Seed is very small and usually remains enclosed in 
the glumes.  There are approximately 1,230,000 
seeds per pound. 
 

Timothy seed. Steve Hurst. Provided by ARS Systematic 
Botany and Mycology Laboratory.  
 

 

 

Distribution: Timothy is distributed throughout the 
entire United States; however, it grows best in the 
northern half of the nation and along mountain chains 
further south. 
 
Agricultural use of timothy in the U.S. occurs 
primarily in the Northwest, upper Midwest, and 
Northeast.  For a current distribution map, consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Website. 

Habitat:  Timothy can be found growing in 
waterways, dry to wet meadows and other mesic 
environments. It is commonly found volunteering in 
canals and roadside borrow ditches. 

Adaptation 
Timothy is an introduced bunchgrass adapted to cool, 
humid areas and to high elevations. It performs well, 
with moderate to high yields, on wet fertile lands. It 
is adapted to irrigation and areas with effective 
annual precipitation of at least 45 cm (18 in). It 
prefers finer textured soils, such as clays to clay 
loams to loams and is adapted to soils with a pH of 
5.5 to 7.0. It is tolerant of partially shaded conditions. 
Timothy is very winter-hardy. It exhibits tolerance to 
both cold temperature, and ice encasement, a major 
factor affecting winter survival. It is not well adapted 
to wet, flat land where water stands for extended 
periods of time, though it can withstand somewhat 
poorly-drained soils. It does not tolerate drought or 
prolonged high temperatures and it does not tolerate 
alkaline conditions. 
 
Timothy is compatible in mixes with legumes. It 
establishes cover quickly, volunteers readily on 
preferred sites, is late maturing, and is very palatable 
early in the growing season (jointing stage) and only 
moderately palatable later in the growing season 
(post seedhead development). Timothy hay is a 
premium feed for horses and is compatible in legume 
mixes.  Severe damage can result from early grazing 
under wet conditions. It regrows very slowly 
following grazing or haying. Other recommended 
sites include cool, moist meadows and open forests. 
 
Timothy establishes quickly and volunteers readily 
on preferred sites. It invades wet areas along ditches, 
canals, drains, and streams and can be a weed in 
these areas. 

Establishment 
Timothy is usually seeded in mixtures with legumes.  
This mixture may be planted with a small grain.  If 
planted with a winter grain, the timothy is seeded 
with the grain in the fall, and the legume is planted 
early the following spring.  Seeding depth of timothy 
should be about 0.3 to 1.3 cm (0.125 to 0.5 in).  A 
firm, weed-free seedbed is a key to a successful 
planting. Common seeding rates are 3 to 6 pounds 

per acre when seeded alone and 1 to 3 pounds per 
acre when seeded in mixtures. The average number 
of seeds per square foot at 1 lb. seeding rate is 28 
seeds. Seeding rates should be doubled if seed is 
broadcast planted. 

Management 
Timothy is a short-lived, shallow-rooted, introduced, 
perennial bunchgrass. In spring, the crowns form 
swollen, bulblike internodes that store energy. Close 
grazing and trampling during moist conditions can 
damage these internodes and severely reduce stands. 
 
Timothy should be grazed before the jointing stage 
and hayed before seed heads have emerged from boot 
to early bloom stage. Begin grazing during the 
vegetative stage, after grass has reached at least 15 
cm (6 in) in height. A 10 cm (4 in) stubble height 
should remain following grazing. It regrows slowly 
following grazing or haying. A 28 to 35 day recovery 
period between grazing or haying cycles is 
recommended. 
 
Timothy is highly responsive to fertilizers, which 
should be applied frequently based in accordance 
with soil tests.  Fertilizer, especially nitrogen, is 
important when legumes such as clover species have 
almost disappeared from the hay or pasture mixture. 
 
Timothy stands become weak under close and 
continuous grazing.  A fundamental reason for the 
decline of timothy under poor grazing practices is 
injury to the bulblets (haplacorm).  These bulblets 
form in the spring at the same time the stem 
elongates.  Food reserves are stored in the bulblets, 
and they may be destroyed through trampling by 
grazing animals in the spring. 
 
Timothy can be initially grazed before jointing and 
again between early head to full head.  Second and 
successive grazing periods should occur before 
jointing and when basal sprouts appear at the soil 
surface.  After the second grazing period, plants 
usually do not joint; therefore, sprouts are the 
primary grazing guide.  Timothy should be cut for 
hay or silage from boot stage to early head or 
flowering stage.  Make successive harvests for hay 
and silage when basal sprouts appear at the soil 
surface.  Sterile seed-heads may be 38 to 50 cm (15 
to 20 in) up the stems when sprouts appear at the time 
of second cutting.  Growing points stay below ground 
level after the second cutting.  Graze or cut to heights 
of 10 cm (4 in) or more. 

Pests and Potential Problems 
Stem rust is a disease that can cause loss of vigor and 
forage quality to timothy.  Rust-resistant varieties 
have been developed to control this disease. Purple 
eyespot (Cladosporium phlei) and leaf streak 
(Drechslera phlei) are diseases commonly found 

 

 

across western Canada. Timothy is also damaged by 
brown leaf blight and grasshoppers.  New fields are 
also susceptible to wireworm or cutworms.  European 
skipper larvae (a bright orange butterfly) are a pest of 
timothy in eastern Canada. 

Seed Production 
Seed production fields should be soil tested before 
planting to determine soil nutrient levels and fertilizer 
needs.  Seed should be drilled or broadcast into a 
weed free, firm seedbed.  The optimum seeding depth 
is 0.3 to 1.3 cm (0.125 to 0.5 in).  The drill seeding 
rate of 1 to 2 pounds PLS per acre in 45 to 60 cm (18 
to 24 in) rows provides a good stand.  Wider row 
spacing may be beneficial to seed production in dry 
climates. 
 
Under irrigated conditions, seed yields average 450 
to 670 kg/ha (400 to 500 lb/ac). Seed production 
under dryland conditions is not recommended in the 
western United States. In the eastern United States, 
seed production yields of 336 to 450 kg/ha (300 to 
400 lb/ac) can be expected. 
 
Timothy shatters readily but should not be swathed 
too soon.  It is usually ready to swath when 5 to 10 
percent of the seed have shattered (late July to early 
August).  The seedheads will have a tan color and the 
stems and leaves will be a golden color.  Swathing 
early in the morning will help reduce seed shatter.  
Allow 5 to 14 days of drying before combining. 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Most of the timothy grown in the U.S. is common 
timothy.  Improved cultivars and places of 
development are: ‘Essex’ and ‘Cornell 1777’ (New 
York); ‘Lorain’ and ‘Marietta’ (Ohio); ‘Itasca’ 
(Minnesota); ‘Clair’ (Kentucky), and ‘Verdant’ 
(Wisconsin).  Canadian releases are ‘Bounty’, 
‘Climax’, ‘Drummond’, ‘Medon’, ‘Milton’, ‘Paton’, 
and ‘Swallow’.  Common timothy and most cultivars 
can be readily obtained from commercial sources.  
There are many proprietary timothy varieties grown 
under contract for seed companies. 

References 
Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada. 2004.  Timothy 
Seed Production in Western Canada. Online at: 
http://www1.agric.gov.ab.ca/$Department/deptd
ocs.nsf/all/agdex8696. [accessed Aug. 27, 2009]. 
Alderson, J. and WC Sharp 1994.  Grass varieties in 

the United States.  Agriculture Handbook No. 
170.  USDA, SCS, Washington, D.C. 

Barkworth, Mary, et. al. 2007. Manual of grasses for 

North America. Intermountain Herbarium and 
Utah State University Press, Logan, Utah. 

Cronquist, A., AH Holmgren, NH. Holmgren, JL. 

Reveal, & PK. Holmgren 1977.  Intermountain 
flora.  Vol. 6.  The New York Botanical Garden.  

Columbia University Press, New York, New 
York. 

Hitchcock, AS. 1950.  Manual of the grasses of the 

United States.  USDA, Washington, DC. 

Holzworth, LK. and LE. Wiesner. 1985. Grass and 

Legume Seed Production in Montana and 
Wyoming.  USDA-SCS Bridger Plant Materials 
Center. 31 p. 

Majerus, M. 2009. Forage and Reclamation Grasse 

of the Northern Great Plains and Rocky 
Mountains Valley Printers, Bridger, Montana. 
McElroy, AR and H.T. Kunelius. 1995. Timonthy. 

Pp. 305-311 in R.F. Barnes, D.A. Miller and C.J. 
Nelson (eds.) Forages volume I: An introduction 
to grassland agriculture. Iowa State University 
Press, Ames. 

USDA, Forest Service 1996.  Fire effects information 

system.  Version: 000413.  
<http://www.fs.fed.us/ database/feis/>.  Rocky 
Mountain Research Station, Fire Sciences 
Laboratory, Missoula, Montana. 

USDA, NRCS 2000.  The PLANTS database.  

Version: 000413.  <http://plants.usda.gov>.  
National Plant Data Center, Baton Rouge, 
Louisiana. 

Zamora, Ben, Oregon State University, Range Plant 

Leaflet No. 47. Corvallis, Oregon 

 
 
 

 

 

Prepared By:   
Daniel G. Ogle, Plant Materials Specialist USDA 
NRCS, Boise, ID 
 
Loren St. John, Team Leader, USDA NRCS, Plant 
Materials Center, Aberdeen, ID 
 
Derek J. Tilley, Agronomist, USDA NRCS, Plant 
Materials Center, Aberdeen, ID 
 
Edited: 07Oct2009jfh; 10Oct2009mws; 18Mar2011dgo; 18Mar2011lsj; 
18Mar2011djt;  

Citation 
Ogle, DG, St. John, L and DJ Tilley. 2011. Plant 
guide for timothy (Phleum pratense). USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Idaho State Office. 
Boise, ID. 

Published March, 2011 

For more information about this and other plants, 
please contact your local NRCS field office or 
Conservation District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ 
and visit the PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant Materials Program 
Web site http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or 
availability of other Web sites.

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

