 

 

NARROWLEAF 
MOUNTAINMINT 
Pycnanthemum tenuifolium 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS Cape May Plant 
Materials Center  

Schrad. 

Plant Symbol = PYTE 

 
Narrowleaf mountainmint (Pycnanthemum tenuifolium) (Photo by, 
Jolie Dollar, Xerces Society 
 
Alternate Names 
Common Alternate Names:  
Virginia thyme 
slender mountain mint 
common horsemint 
 
Uses 
Wildlife Use: Pycnanthemum. tenuifolium provides a 
nectar source for pollinators and is well suited for use 
in pollinator restoration habitat. Preliminary 
observation found that P. tenuifolium attracted 20 
different species of Hymenoptera and Lepidoptera in 
Cape May, New Jersey. The sweat bees 
Lasioglossum vierecki, Halictus confusus, and 
Halictus ligatus were most frequently observed 
visiting the flower. Both Lasioglossum sp. and 
Halictus confuses in particular are important 
pollinators of pepper , watermelon, strawberry, and 
tomato plants. 
 
Robertson (1928) collected 29 species of Lepidoptera 
from P. tenuifolium in Central Illinois. This is one of 
the greatest numbers of species to visit a flower from 
the 244 species of flowering plants in his study. In 
Tooker et al. (2006), 9 species of fly were found on 

 
 

 

 

Plant Guide

P. tenuifolium; and Robertson (1929) captured 31 
species of fly. 
 
Deer may browse the leaves and a variety of animals 
will eat the seeds. It is reported that the seeds are too 
small to attract birds (Hilty, 2012). 
 
Erosion Control: P. tenuifolium spreads quickly 
through rhizomes and so would make a good soil 
stabilizer. 
 
Ethnobotany 
P. tenuifolium has been used in herbal teas and by 
many native tribes as a seasoning in food to improve 
flavor. Members of the genus Pycnanthemum were 
once referred to as American wild basil; so 
widespread was its use as a food additive (Austin and 
Honychurch, 2004). 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General: P. tenuifolium is a native, warm season, 
perennial forb that grows 2–3 ft tall and spreads 
equally wide. It is a member of the Lamiaceae (mint) 
family and the crushed flowers or leaves emit a minty 
scent. Like other mints, it has a four angled stem and 
small opposite leaves. The stem is smooth, without 
hairs, and is slender and stiff. The plant has a taproot 
and rhizomes. 
 
The pale green leaves are approximately 0.15–0.6 in 
wide and 0.5–2 in long. They are smooth or minutely 
hairy on the uppermost leaves. The upper leaves are 
stalkless while the lowest leaves have short stems. 
There are short leafy branches in the axils. 
 
The plant has profuse clusters of small, tubular, white 
flowers which bloom in the middle of summer; July 
through August. The flower petals have an upper lip, 
and three-lobed lower lip. Clusters stagger their 
bloom period over a long period of time. It is thought 
that pollinators prefer this species because the florets 
are tightly clustered, have short corolla tubes, and are 
white (Tooker et al., 2002). 
 
Distribution: The plant grows from Canada south to 
Florida, west to Texas, and northwest to Minnesota. 
For current distribution, please consult the Plant 

 

Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Habitat: P. tenuifolium grows in dry to medium wet 
soils and in full sun to partial shade. It is found in 
rocky ground in open prairies and upland woods, as 
well as in low areas, wet thickets, pine barrens, oak 
woods, and on the edges of wooded areas. Gleason 
and Cronquist (1963) observe that it is most often 
found in dry soils of upland woods and prairies. 
 
The wetland indicator status of this plant is both 
facultative (FAC) and facultative wetland (FACW) 
depending on the region under consideration. 
Facultative species are equally likely to occur in 
wetlands as non-wetlands. Facultative wetland plants 
usually occur in wetlands (estimated probability 
67%–99%). Please consult the PLANTS Web site to 
determine the wetland status for your region.  
 
Establishment 
P. tenuifolium should be grown in full sun in moist to 
slightly dry soils. Although seeds are small and 
difficult to use, it can be propagated by seed. Seeds 
germinate without pretreatment. It may also be 
propagated by cuttings or division. Cuttings should 
be made in June and divisions should be done during 
dormancy (from late fall to early spring). 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no major pests or problems known for this 
plant, although it may be vulnerable to rust. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
It forms colonies by spreading through rhizomes and 
can show aggressive growth.  
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Seeds mature in late September and should be 
collected when the black seeds can be shaken out of 
old blooms. The seeds do not have hairs but can still 
be easily carried by the wind. One ounce of seed 
contains roughly 375,000- 378,000 seeds. The seeds 
have low protein content. 
 
References 
Austin, D.F., and P.N. Honychurch. 2004. Florida 
ethnobotany. CRC Press. Boca Raton, FL. p. 
941. 

Carr, M.E. 1985. Plant species evaluated for new 

crop potential. Econ. Bot. 39(3):336-345. 

Gleason, H.A., and A. Cronquist. 1963. Manual of 

vascular plants of Northeastern United States and 
adjacent Canada. Van Nostrand Reinhold 
Company. New York, NY. 

Hilty, J. 2012. Illinois wildflowers: Pycnanthemum 

tenuifolium (slender mountain mint). 

http://www.wildflower.org/plants/result.php?id_
plant=PYTE (accessed 17 Apr. 2012). 

Missouri Botanic Garden. 2012. Pycnanthemum 

tenuifolium (slender mountain mint) 
http://www.missouribotanicalgarden.org/gardens
-gardening/your-garden/plant-finder/plant-
details/kc/r690/pycnanthemum-tenuifolium.aspx 
(accessed 17 Apr. 2012). 

Robertson, C. 1928. Flowers and insects: lists of 

visitors of four hundred and fifty-three flowers. 
The Science Press Printing Company, Lancaster, 
PA.  

Stone, W. 1973.The plants of Southern New Jersey. 

Quarterman Publications, Inc. Boston, Mass.  

The University of Texas at Austin Wildflower 
Center. 2012. Pycnanthemum tenuifolium 
http://www.wildflower.org/plants/result.php?id_
plant=PYTE (accessed 17 Apr. 2012). Native 
Plant Database, Austin, Texas. 

Tooker, J.F., M. Hauser, and L. M. Hanks. 2006. 

Floral host plants of Syrphidae and Tachinidae 
(Diptera) of Central Illinois. Ann. Entomol. Soc. 
AM. 99 (1): 96-112. 

Tooker, J.F., P. F. Reagel, and L.M. Hanks. 2002. 
Nectar sources of day-flying Lepidoptera of 
Central Illinois. Anal. Entomol. Soc. of Am., 95 
(1): 84-96.  

Toupal, R.S. 2006. An ethnobotany of Indiana Dunes 

National Lakeshore: A baseline study 
emphasizing plant relationships of the Miami 
and Potawatomi Peoples. Bureau of Applied 
Research in Anthropology. University of 
Arizona. 
http://www.csu.edu/cerc/documents/Ethnobotany
INDunesNationalLakeshore2006.pdf (accessed 
17 Apr. 2012)  

 
Prepared By: Christopher M. Sheahan. USDA-
NRCS, Cape May Plant Materials Center, Cape May, 
NJ. 
 
Citation: Sheahan, C.M. 2012. Plant guide for 
narrowleaf mountainmint (Pycnanthemum. 
tenuifolium). USDA-NRCS, Cape May Plant 
Materials Center. Cape May, NJ.  
 
Edited:  
 
For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or Conservation District at  
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant Materials Program Web site 
http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or 
availability of other Web sites. 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

