TAPER-LEAVED 

PENSTEMON 

Penstemon attenuatus Douglas ex 

Lindl. 

Plant Symbol = PEAT3 

Contributed by:  NRCS Plant Materials Center, Pullman, 
WA 

 

 

 
 

Plant Guide

Uses 
Pollinator habitat: Penstemon attenuatus is a source of 
pollen and nectar for a variety of bees, including honey 
bees and native bumble bees, as well as butterflies and 
moths. 

Bumble bee visiting a Penstemon attenuatus flower. Pamela 
Pavek 

Rangeland diversification: This plant can be included in 
seeding mixtures to improve the diversity of rangelands. 
 
Ornamental: Penstemon attenuatus is very attractive and 
easy to manage as an ornamental in urban, water-saving 
landscapes.  Rugged Country Plants (2012) recommends 
placing P. attenuatus in the back row of a perennial bed, 
in rock gardens and on embankments.  It is hardy to 
USDA Plant Hardiness Zone 4 (Rugged Country Plants 
2012).   

Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

 

Penstemon attenuatus. Pamela Pavek 

Alternate Names 
Common Alternate Names: taper-leaf penstemon, sulphur 
penstemon, sulphur beardtongue (P. attenuatus var. 
palustris), south Idaho penstemon (P. attenuatus var. 
militaris), small penstemon (P. attenuatus var. 
pseudoprocerus) 
 
Scientific Alternate Names:  None 

 
 

 

Description 
General:  Figwort family (Scrophulariaceae).  Penstemon 
attenuatus is a native, perennial forb that grows from a 
dense crown to a height of 10 to 90 cm (4 to 35 in).  
Leaves are dark green, opposite and entire, however the 
margins of P. attenuatus var. attenuatus leaves are often, 
at least in part, finely toothed (Strickler 1997).  Basal 
leaves are petiolate, up to 4 cm (1.5 in) wide and 17 cm (7 
in) long.  Stem leaves are smaller and mostly clasping.  
Flowers bloom in May and June, and can be blue to 
purple and pink, or pale yellow to nearly white.  The 
inflorescence consists of two whorls of flowers around the 
stem at each leaf axis.  Flowers have five lanceolate to 
ovate or obovate petals with translucent margins, and are 
1 to 2 cm (3/8 to 3/4 in) long.  The petals are fused to 
form a tube that is expanded toward the mouth and has 

two lips.  The lower lip and staminode are hairy.  Seeds 
are dark brown, round, and occur in capsules 3 to 6 mm 
(1/8 to 1/4 in) long.  Overall the appearance of P. 
attenuatus is very similar to other Penstemon species, 
causing difficulties in identification. (Hitchcock and 
Cronquist 1973; Lyons and Merilees 1995; Burke 
Museum of Natural History and Culture 2012). 

 

Penstemon attenuatus flowers. Pamela Pavek 

The genus name Penstemon is derived from Greek 
“pente” meaning five and “stemon” meaning thread, 
referring to the five stamens (Charters 2012).  The species 
name attenuatus translated from Latin is “tapering 
gradually to a very slender tip” (Hitchcock and Cronquist 
1973). 

Distribution:  The range of Penstemon attenuatus extends 
from eastern Washington and Oregon to western 
Montana, southern Idaho and north-central Wyoming 
(Burke Museum of Natural History and Culture 2012).  
The species is currently divided into four varieties 
(ecotypes): var. attenuatus (found in Washington, 
Oregon, Idaho and Montana), var. militaris (found in 
Idaho and Montana), var. palustris (found in Oregon and 
Idaho), and var. pseudoprocerus (found in Idaho, 
Montana and Wyoming).  For current distribution, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 

Habitat:  Penstemon attenuatus grows in dry meadows 
and moist, open to wooded slopes in the mountains and 
foothills (Burke Museum of History and Culture 2012). 

 

 

 

Adaptation 
Penstemon attenuatus is adapted to areas receiving 30 to 
64 cm (12 to 25 in) annual precipitation at elevations up 
to 3,000 m (5,000 ft).  It grows in well-drained, medium-
textured soils. 
 

 

Penstemon attenuatus var. attenuatus. G.D. Carr, University 
of Washington Burke Herbarium 

Establishment 
Plants can be established by seed or seedlings.  Seed 
should be planted in a firm, weed-free seed bed in the fall 
at a rate of 1.65 kg PLS/ha (1.5 lb PLS/ac).  If the seed is 
planted in a mix, the seeding rate should be adjusted 
according to the proportion of P. attenuatus in the mix. 
Penstemon seed is very small compared to other species, 
and will be dispersed by the implement too quickly unless 
the drill box has constant agitation and rice hulls are used, 
or the drill can be set to have a very low seeding rate 
without rice hulls. 
 
The seed should be planted at a depth no greater than 0.3 
cm (1/8 in).  If the seed is drilled, the drill should be set 
no deeper than 0.3 cm (1/8 in) or the seed should be 
placed in a separate drill box (with other small-seeded 
species) and the tubes for this box should be pulled so the 
seed is dropped on the soil surface.  Drag chains or press 
wheels should be used as long as the seed is not covered 
with more than 0.3 cm (1/8 in) of soil.  Skinner (2007) 
found germination rates were higher among seed that had 
been covered lightly with soil than seeds left bare, and he 

attributed this to protection from fluctuating moisture 
levels.   
 
The seed can also be broadcast onto the soil surface with 
a broadcast spreader, and pressed into the soil with a 
roller packer.  When using a broadcast seeding method, 
the seeding rate should be doubled to account for 
predation and environmental factors that cause damage to 
the seed during the winter months.   
 
To establish plants by seedlings, the seed should be 
planted in containers in October, left outside to stratify in 
cold and moist conditions for a minimum of 90 days, and 
moved into a greenhouse in January.  Alternatively, the 
seed could be moist stratified in a refrigerator at 2 to 4 
degrees C (35 to 40 degrees F) for a minimum of 90 days, 
and planted in a greenhouse (Skinner 2007).  If the soil is 
kept moist, germination occurs within four to seven days 
(Skinner 2007).  The plants should be kept in the 
greenhouse for three to four months, and hardened off in a 
cold frame for two to four weeks prior to transplanting to 
a prepared field site in the spring (Skinner 2007).  Ideal 
plant spacing is 15 to 45 cm (6 to 18 in).   

Management 
Penstemon attenuatus is able to withstand infrequent 
mowing.  This method may be used for weed control in 
newly-established forb plantings, however mowing 
should be delayed until after seed maturity.  Pre-emergent 
herbicides can be used to control annual weeds in fields 
with at least one year of growth, or where seedlings have 
been transplanted.   

Pests and Potential Problems 
None known. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
None. 

Seeds and Plant Production 
Experiments with seed of P. attenuatus var. attenuatus at 
the Pullman Plant Materials Center demonstrated an 
extended cold moist stratification period is needed to 
break seed dormancy.  Skinner (2007) had 0% emergence 
with no seed treatment, 10% emergence with 45 days of 
cold, moist stratification, and 72% emergence with 90 
days of cold, moist stratification.  Containers left outside 
during the winter and spring months had 95% emergence.  
Skinner attributed this higher emergence to a longer 
stratification period, and not fluctuating spring 
temperatures, since plants in the greenhouse thrived at a 
constant warm temperature.  Skinner (2007) also found 
seed covered lightly with soil had higher germination 
rates than seed left uncovered on the soil surface.   
 
Penstemon attenuatus has approximately 3,300,000 seeds 
per kg (1,500,000 seeds per lb) (Barner 2009).  Seeds are 
mature when the capsules begin to split.  Plants retain the 
seed for a long period if wind is not excessive (Skinner 

 

 

2007) which facilitates seed harvesting.  Small amounts 
of seed can be obtained by removing the plant stems, 
crushing them on a rub board, and separating the seed 
from the plant material with an air column separator.  
Larger amounts of seed can be threshed with a brush 
machine or hammer mill and cleaned with air screen 
equipment (Skinner 2007; Barner 2009). 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
None, but seed and plants are available from several 
vendors. 

References 
Barner, J. 2009. Propagation protocol for production of 

Penstemon attenuatus Douglas ex Lindl. seeds; 
USDA-FS-R6 Bend Seed Extractory, Bend, Oregon. 
In: Native Plants Network. [Online]. Available at: 
http://www.nativeplantnetwork.org (accessed 17 
January 2012). Moscow, ID: University of Idaho, 
College of Natural Resources, Forest Research 
Nursery. 

Burke Museum of Natural History and Culture.  [Online]. 

Available at: 
http://biology.burke.washington.edu/herbarium/imag
ecollection.php (accessed 17Jan 2012). University of 
Washington, Seattle, WA. 

Charters, M.L. 2012.  California Plant Names: Latin and 
Greek Meanings and Derivations. [Online] Available 
at: http://www.calflora.net/botanicalnames/  
(accessed 17 Jan 2012).  

Hitchcock, C.L. and A. Cronquist. 1973. Flora of the 

Pacific Northwest. University of Washington Press, 
Seattle and London. 

Lyons, C.P. and B. Merilees. 1995. Trees, Shrubs and 

Flowers to Know in Washington and British 
Columbia. Lone Pine Press, Auburn, WA, 
Vancouver, BC, and Edmonton, AB. 

Rugged Country Plants. 2012. [Online] Available at: 
http://www.ruggedcountryplants.com/penstemon-
attenuatus.htm (Accessed 18 Jan 2012). 

Skinner, D.M. 2007. Propagation protocol for production 
of container Penstemon attenuatus Dougl. ex Lindl. 
plants (10 cu in); USDA-NRCS Pullman Plant 
Materials Center, Pullman, Washington. In: Native 
Plants Network. [Online]. Available at: 
http://www.nativeplantnetwork.org (accessed 17 
January 2012). Moscow, ID: University of Idaho, 
College of Natural Resources, Forest Research 
Nursery. 

Strickler, D. 1997. Northwest Penstemons. The Flower 

Press, Columbia Falls, MT.  

 
Prepared By 
Pamela L.S. Pavek, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Pullman, Washington 
 
David M. Skinner, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Pullman, Washington (retired) 

Citation 
Pavek, P.L.S., and D.M. Skinner 2012. Plant guide for 
taper-leaved penstemon (Penstemon attenuatus). USDA 
Natural Resources Conservation Service, Pullman Plant 
Materials Center. Pullman, WA. 

Published February 2012 
Edited: 18Jan2012 dms; 07Feb2012 mes; 17Feb2012 jab; 
17Feb2012 plsp 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

