 
 

 

Plant Guide

for use along vegetated swales or waterways.  The 
bluish color of some foliage gives this species some 
ornamental character. 

 

Wildlife:  Florida paspalum produces an abundance of 
large grain-like seed which is eaten by birds 
including quail, dove, and turkey.  Wildlife, 
especially game birds, use Florida paspalum for both 
food and cover (Grelen and Hughs, 1984).  Seeds 
mature over an extended period of time, with an 
initial flush in late August and continuing until frost, 
providing wildlife with a dependable source of food 
from late summer into winter.   

Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Description 
General:  Florida paspalum is a native warm-season, 
perennial rhizomatous grass, typically ranging in 
height from 3 to 5 feet and up to 8 feet with higher 
fertility.  Plants are bunch-like but slowly spread 
from short, thick rhizomes forming a sod over time, 
especially under grazing.  New growth begins in 
early spring.  Plants may be dark green or have a 
chalky cast that gives a bluish appearance.  Leaf 
sheaths and leaf blades may have short coarse hairs 
or may be hairless.  The leaf blades are firm, flat or 
folded, approximately 3/8” to 3/4” wide and 14” to 
20” long, with a dense tuft of long hairs immediately 
above the ligule.  Leaf sheaths are open, rounded, and 
frequently covered in hair (Leithead, Yarlett and 
Shiflet, 1971).   
 
The seeds heads are similar in appearance to other 
paspalum species, although with generally larger seed 
than most.  Seeds are half-rounded and smooth and 
are crowded pairs along either side of the branches. 
The seed heads have 2 to 6 branches (racemes) that 
are each 3” to 4” long.  Florida paspalum produces an 
abundance of large seed that mature over an extended 
period of time from late summer to late fall as new 
seed heads are continually produced from late July 
until frost.      
 
Habitat:  Florida paspalum is commonly found 
growing in grassy areas and wood openings, with 
low, moist, sandy soil and along fresh or brackish 
marshes.        
 
 

FLORIDA PASPALUM 
Paspalum floridanum Michx. 

Plant Symbol = PAFL4 

Contributed by:  USDA NRCS National Plant 
Materials Center 

USDA  NRCS Norman A. Berg National Plant Materials Center 

 

Alternate Names 
Paspalum difforme Le Conte 
Paspalum floridanum Michx. var. glabratum 

Engelm. ex Vasey 

Paspalum giganteum Baldw. ex Vasey 
Paspalum glabratum (Engelm. ex Vasey) C. Mohr  

Uses 
Forage:  “Florida paspalum is palatable and is 
readily grazed by cattle during its growing season.  
Because this grass is succulent, it deteriorates rapidly 
after maturity, making it unimportant as dry winter 
forage” (Leithead, Yarlett and Shiflet, 1971).   Young 
leaves are palatable and nutritious, becoming less so 
as the plant matures.  In a native warm- season grass 
forage trial in Maryland, Florida paspalum exhibited 
good seedling vigor and stand establishment, 
excellent tolerance to drought, and good initial yields 
(Ugiansky, R.J., L. Vough, and E. Dengler, 2008).   

 

Erosion Control:  Florida paspalum is a versatile 
grass that readily grows on disturbed areas such as 
road ditches as well as on sandy or poorly drained 
sites.  Being well adapted to wet soils, it is suitable 

 

 
Distribution:  

 

 
Florida paspalum’s native range is from Pennsylvania 
and New Jersey south to Florida, west to Kansas, 
Oklahoma and Texas.  For current distribution, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Adaptation 
Florida paspalum is adapted to most, acid to neutral 
soils in the eastern US.  It is also adapted to sandy 
well-drained, deep, upland soils with underlying fine 
textured soils (Leithead, Yarlett and Shiflet, 1971).          

Establishment 
Florida paspalum establishes quite easily from seed 
compared to many other warm-season grasses. 
Seedlings are vigorous and compete well with 
concurrently germinating weeds, establishing well in 
the first growing season with adequate moisture and 
fertility.  Florida paspalum can be seeded in a pure 
stand or in a mix of other species with a seeding 
depth of 1/4” on fine textured soils and up to 3/4” on 
coarse textured soils.  The smooth seed can be 
planted with most seed drills or broadcast seeded into 
a prepared firm seedbed.  It is recommended to firm 
the seedbed after seeding with a roller or culti-packer.  
General seeding recommendations are 6 to 8 pounds 
PLS per acre for most applications.  Seeds are large 
and light with approximately 91,000 seeds/lb.  With 
adequate moisture, most seeds will germinate within 
7 days.  If needed control any tall weeds that shade 
the seedlings in the first growing season by mowing 
at a height of 6 to 8 inches.  Good moisture and 
nutrient availability will enhance establishment.  
Additional nitrogen, at a rate 30 to 60 pounds per 
acre, may be applied to pure stands to increase 
growth, but this increased growth and 
competitiveness may not be desirable for mixed 
stands.     
 
 

Freshly harvested seed has a high degree of 
dormancy which is reduced as the seed ages.  
Ambient (room) temperature storage reduces 
dormancy better than cold stratification treatment, 
with the best germination attained after 9 months of 
ambient storage (Brakie, M., J. Stevens, and J. 
Douglas, 2008).  Cold storage reduces seed dormancy 
less quickly, requiring a minimum of 3 years of cold 
storage to reduce seed dormancy (Brakie, M., J. 
Stevens, and J. Douglas, 2006).   

Management 
Florida paspalum will begin growth earlier in the 
spring and have increased vigor if thatch is mowed or 
burned in late winter to early spring.  Florida 
paspalum responds well to burning and tolerates 
repeated cutting.  Stems and leaves of Florida 
paspalum are relatively soft and will fall over and 
break down more quickly over the winter than other 
tall warm-season grasses such as switchgrass.      

Pests and Potential Problems 
Florida  Paspalum  appears  to  be  relatively  free  of 
significant disease or pests problems.  Stem and leaf 
rusts  appear  to  be  much  less  of  a  problem  than  on 
many  other  warm-season  grasses  in  wet  years.  
Leaves  generally  have  a  very  healthy  clean 
appearance.               

Seeds and Plant Production 
Plants are highly fertile and do not require cross 
pollination with unrelated individuals to achieve 
good seed set like many other warm-season grasses 
often require.  Jessup (2007) has demonstrated that 
Florida paspalum is a meiotically irregular polyploid 
with about 160 chromosomes that analysis suggests 
reproduces by facultative apomixes.  This means that 
seedlings are for the most part are genetically 
identical to the plant that produced the seed.  Seeds 
are produced in abundance but shatter somewhat 
easily making harvest timing difficult.  When the first 
seed heads mature there are also younger seed heads 
present at all stages of development, making harvest 
with a combine somewhat problematic.  Two 
harvests may be obtained if the first harvest is done 
early and cut above newly emerging seed heads and 
then harvested again about a month later.  More than 
two harvests may be made with a seed stripper type 
harvester, but care should be taken to allow for 
enough clearance of equipment over the plants to 
minimize breaking the easily damages stems.      
    
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Harrison germplasm Florida paspalum was released 
in 2004 by the East Texas Plant Materials Center in 
Nacogdoches, Texas.  The seed for this release was 
originally collected from a native stand in Harrison 
County, Texas by Paul Leggett and Ross Brown of 
NRCS.   Harrison Germplasm Florida paspalum is 

 

 

recommended for wildlife food/cover, mine 
reclamation, prairie restoration, and a component of 
native grass forage mixes. 

Mid-Atlantic germplasm Florida paspalum was 
released in 2009 by the Norman A. Berg National 
Plant Materials Center in Beltsville, Maryland.  It 
consists of a composite increase of nine collections 
from Maryland, New Jersey and Delaware.  It is 
recommended for soil stabilization, filter strips, 
meadow plantings, wildlife food and cover as well as 
for forage, especially in wet soils. 
 
References 
Brakie, M., J. Stevens, and J. Douglas. 2006. Effect 
of age of seed and prechill on germination of two 
Florida paspalum seed lots. Nacogdoches, TX. 

Brakie, M., A. Shadow and J. Stevens. 2008. Effect  
of ambient and cool storage on seed germination of 
harrison germplasm florida paspalum. 
Nacogdoches, TX. 

Grelen, H.E. and R.H Hughes. 1984. Common 

herbaceous plants of southern forest range. USDA-
FS Res. Paper SO-210. 

Jessup, J.L., Jessup, R.W. and Burson, B.L. 2007. 

Genetic variation within Florida paspalum as 
detected by SSR analysis and flow cytometry 
[abstract]. American Society of Agronomy. Paper 
No. 363. 

Ugiansky, R.J., L. Vough, and E. Dengler. 2008.  
Maryland native warm-season grass 2008 forage 
trial report.  USDA, NRCS, National Plant 
Materials Center, Beltsville, MD and Maryland 
Cooperative Extension, College Park, MD. 7p. 

 
Prepared By:  R. Jay Ugiansky, USDA NRCS 
National Plant Materials Center 

Citation 
Ugiansky, R. 2010. Plant guide for Florida paspalum 
(Paspalum floridanum). USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Norman A. Berg National 
Plant Materials Center. Beltsville, MD 21144. 

Published:  Feb 2011 
For more information about this and other plants, 
please contact your local NRCS field office or 
Conservation District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ 
and visit the PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant Materials Program 
Web site http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or 
availability of other Web sites. 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

