BALDHIP ROSE 
Rosa gymnocarpa Nutt. 

Plant Symbol = ROGY 

Contributed by:  NRCS Plant Materials Center, Pullman, 
Washington 

 
Rosa gymnocarpa. Ben Legler, University of Washington 
Burke Museum of Natural History and Culture 

Alternate Names 
Alternate Common Names:  wood rose, dwarf rose, little 
wild rose (Hitchcock and Cronquist, 1973; Burke 
Museum of Natural History and Culture, 2012) 
 
Alternate Scientific Names:  Rosa apiculata Greene, Rosa 
dasypoda Greene, Rosa helleri Greene, Rosa leucopsis 
Greene, Rosa prionota Greene (Hitchcock et al., 1969) 

Uses 
Wildlife: Baldhip rose fruits remain on the plant 
throughout the winter, and are eaten by small mammals, 
birds and insects (Conrad, 1987 as cited by Reed, 1993).  
Rosa species are important browse for Rocky Mountain 
elk in summer, but the use is lower in fall and winter 
(Kufeld, 1973).  White-tailed and mule deer browse 
baldhip rose, especially in burned areas (Keay and Peek, 
1980). 
 

 

 

Plant Guide

 

Livestock:  Livestock will browse baldhip rose plants, 
however browsing inhibits the spread of the plant, 
probably due to damage to the rhizomes from trampling 
(Zimmerman and Neuenschwander, 1984). 
 
Pollinators and Beneficial Insects:  The primary insect 
pollinators of roses are pollen-gathering bees (Mader et 
al., 2011).  The open-faced flowers of native roses are 
more attractive to pollinators than ornamental varieties 
with double flowers (Mader et al., 2011). 
 
Ethnobotanical: Baldhip rose was used for a variety of 
purposes by native people in the Pacific Northwest.  The 
Okanagan-Colville and Thompson used the stems and 
branches to construct baby carriers and arrows.  They 
made a decoction of the branches and leaves for a body 
and hair wash in sweat baths, as a wash for sore eyes, to 
soak fishing lines and nets for good luck, for hunters to 
remove human scent, and as a tea for protection from bad 
spirits, for general disposition, and a tonic.  They also 
used a poultice of chewed leaves for treating bee stings, 
and smoked dried leaves with leaves from other plants.  
The rose hips were a minor source of food, and children 
played with them as beads.  (Moerman, 2012).  Interior 
Salish people also used dwarf rose for similar purposes 
(Parish et al., 1996). 
 
Hips of all wild roses are high in vitamin C and are made 
into jams, jellies, syrups and teas.   

Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Description 
General:  Rose family (Rosaceae).  Rosa gymnocarpa is 
an erect to spreading, long-lived shrub native to the 
western U.S. and Canada.  It grows 1 to 4 feet tall and has 
multiple slender stems that are covered with straight, 
weak prickles, or are sometimes unarmed.  Leaves are 
alternate, deciduous, and odd-pinnate with 5 to 9 leaflets.  
The leaf stems and underside of the leaf midrib have 
stalked glands.  Leaflets are elliptic to elliptic-ovate, and 
have doubly serrated margins with gland-tipped teeth, 
otherwise the leaflets are smooth.  Flowers occur at the 
ends of branches, bloom in May through July, and are 
usually solitary and small.  Petals are 0.4 to 0.6 inch long, 
are light to dark pink, and are broadly notched. Flowers 
have numerous stamens and pistils, and the styles are 
deciduous as the fruit matures.  The pedicels and sepals 
have stalked glands, and the sepals are erect or ascending 
at anthesis, then deciduous.  The fruit is a pear-shaped 

hypanthium (hip) 0.4 inches long.  It is bright red when it 
is mature in August to September.  The fruit contains 
several seeds that are angled achenes.  The plant 
reproduces sexually by seed and vegetatively by sprouts, 
rhizomes and layering.  (Hitchcock and Cronquist, 1973; 
Young and Young, 1992; Burke Museum of Natural 
History and Culture, 2012). 

Rosa gymnocarpa pedicel and sepals. Ben Legler, University 
of Washington Burke Museum of Natural History and 
Culture 

 

Rosa is a complex and variable genus which hybridizes 
freely with other native roses and sometimes exhibits 
polyploidy and/or apomixis (Hitchcock, et al., 1969).  
Rosa gymnocarpa occasionally hybridizes with R. 
acicularis (prickly rose) and R. nutkana (Nootka rose) 
(Hitchcock et al., 1969). 
 
The genus name Rosa is an ancient Latin name for rose 
(St. John, 1963).  The species name gymnocarpa is from 
Greek gymnos, "naked," and karpos, "fruit" (Charters, 
2012), referring to the deciduous characteristic of the 
sepals (Parish et al., 1996).   
 
Distribution:  Rosa gymnocarpa is found in southern 
British Columbia, on both sides of the Cascade Mountains 
in Washington and Oregon, in the Sierra Nevada of 
California, in northern and central Idaho, and in western 
Montana.  The genus is divided into two varieties: var. 
gymnocarpa, which grows throughout all of the species’ 
range, and var. serpentina, which grows only in 
California and Oregon.  For current distribution, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
 
Habitat:  Rosa gymnocarpa grows as an understory plant 
in dry and moist forest communities, including Douglas-
fir (Pseudotsuga menziesii), ponderosa pine (Pinus 
ponderosa), western white pine (Pinus monticola), 
mountain hemlock (Tsuga mertensiana), Sitka spruce 

(Picea sitchensis), larch (Larix spp.), lodgepole pine 
(Pinus contorta), redwood (Sequoia sempervirens), 
sagebrush (Artemisia spp.), pinyon pine (Pinus spp.), and 
juniper (Juniperus spp.) (Burke Museum of Natural 
History and Culture, 2012; Reed, 1993).  It also grows in 
chaparral and in mountain grasslands (Reed, 1993).  It is 
often found in association with salal (Gaultheria shallon), 
oceanspray (Holodiscus discolor), Oregon grape 
(Mahonia nervosa), creeping Oregon grape (Mahonia 
repens), ninebark (Physocarpus malvaceus), big 
thimbleberry (Rubus parviflorus), and huckleberry 
(Vaccinium membranaceum) (Reed, 1993). 

Adaptation 
This plant is adapted to soils with medium texture, 
moderate fertility, and neutral pH (USDA NRCS, 2012).  
It can tolerate a moderate level of salinity.  The shrub 
grows in areas receiving 12 to 24 inches of annual 
precipitation (USDA NRCS, 2012) at sea level to 6,000 
feet elevation (Hitchcock et al., 1969).  It often grows in 
shade (Piper 1989; and Hungerford, 1986 as cited by 
Reed, 1993). The plant is adapted to low and medium 
severity fires (Reed, 1993), and is moderately tolerant of 
drought (USDA NRCS, 2012). 

Establishment 
Freshly cleaned dwarf rose seed can be sown in the field 
by broadcasting or drilling ¼ to ¾ inch deep, and 
covering with firm soil and mulch (Young and Young, 
1992).  Dried seed needs a cold stratification period of 90 
days for optimal germination.   
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
None known 

Environmental Concerns 
None 

Rosa gymnocarpa thorns. Ben Legler, University of 
Washington Burke Museum of Natural History and Culture 

 

 

 

Seeds and Plant Production 
Rosa gymnocarpa plants are sexually reproductive after 3 
to 5 years of growth (Hungerford, 1957 as cited by Reed, 
1993).  Seed is obtained by collecting rose hips after they 
turn a bright red color (Gill and Pogge, 1974).  The seeds 
can be removed from the hip flesh by macerating the hips 
in water and allowing the debris to float to the surface.  
Seeds collected soon after ripening and not allowed to dry 
are less dormant than dried seeds (Gill and Pogge, 1974; 
Young and Young, 1992). Dried seeds have a hard seed 
coat and require a cold moist stratification period of 90 
days to improve germination (Mirov and Kraebel, 1939; 
Gill and Pogge, 1974; Piper, 1986; Meyer, 2008).  Dried 
seeds stored in air-tight containers will remain viable for 
2 to 4 years (Young and Young, 1992).  There are about 
28,000 seeds per pound (Young and Young 1992; USDA 
NRCS, 2012).   
 
Plants can be produced by sowing seed into pots or flats 
in October or November, then moving into a greenhouse 
in January or February.  Seedlings should be moved to a 
lath house or other structure in the spring and grown for 
one year to develop an adequate root system before 
transplanting.  
 
Baldhip rose can also be reproduced by cuttings or root 
suckers.  Rose et al. (1998) states one successful method 
uses semi-hardwood cuttings treated with indole-3-butyric 
acid (IBA) grown in a mist chamber.  All seedlings and 
propagated plants should be hardened off for two to four 
weeks prior to transplanting in desired field location. 

Rosa gymnocarpa fruit (hip).  Ben Legler, University of 
Washington Burke Museum of Natural History and Culture 

 

 

 

 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
None, but seeds and seedlings are commercially available. 

References 
Burke Museum of Natural History and Culture. 2012. 

Available at 
http://biology.burke.washington.edu/herbarium/imag
ecollection.php (accessed 15 Nov 2012). University 
of Washington, Seattle, WA. 

Charters, M.L. 2012.  California Plant Names: Latin and 

Greek Meanings and Derivations.  Available at 
http://www.calflora.net/botanicalnames/ (accessed 27 
Nov 2012) Michael L. Charters, Sierra Madre, CA.  
Gill, J.D. and F.L. Pogge. 1974. Rosa L. Rose. In: Seeds 

of Woody Plants of the United States. Agriculture 
Handbook No. 450. USDA Forest Service, 
Washington, D.C.  

Hitchcock, C.L., A. Cronquist, M. Ownbey, and J.W. 
Thompson. 1969. Vascular Plants of the Pacific 
Northwest. University of Washington Press, Seattle 
and London. 

Hitchcock, C.L. and A. Cronquist. 1973. Flora of the 

Pacific Northwest. University of Washington Press, 
Seattle and London. 

Keay, J.A. and J.M. Peek. 1980. Relationships between 

fires and winter habitat of deer in Idaho. J. of 
Wildlife Mgmt. 44(2): 372-380. 

Kufeld, R. 1973. Foods eaten by the Rocky Mountain elk. 

J. of Range Mgmt. 26:106-113. 

Mader, E., M. Shepherd., M. Vaughan, S.H. Black, and 

G. LeBuhn. 2011. Attracting Native Pollinators. The 
Xerces Society.  Storey Publishing, North Adams, 
MA. 

Meyer, Susan E. 2008. Rosa L. rose, briar. In: Woody 

Plant Seed Manual. USDA Forest Service 
Agriculture Handbook No. 727. Bonner, F.T., and 
R.G. Nisley (eds.). Available at 
http://www.nsl.fs.fed.us/wpsm/ (accessed 4 Dec 
2012). USDA Forest Service, Provo, UT. 

Mirov, N.T., and C.J. Kraebel. 1939. Collecting and 

Handling Seeds of Wild Plants. Civilian 
Conservation Corps Forestry Publ. No.5. US 
Government Printing Office. Washington, DC. 
Moerman, D. 2012. Native American Ethnobotany 

 

Database. Available at http://herb.umd.umich.edu/  
(accessed 27 Nov 2012) University of Michigan-
Dearborn, Dearborn, MI. 

Parish, R., R. Coupe, and D. Lloyd (eds.) 1996. Plants of  

Southern Interior British Columbia and the Inland 
Northwest. Lone Pine Publishing, Vancouver, BC. 

Piper, J.K. 1989. Seasonality of Fruit Characteristics and 

Seed Removal by Birds. Oikos 46:303-310. 

Reed, W.R. 1993. Rosa gymnocarpa. In: Fire Effects 

Information System, [Online]. U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain 
Research Station, Fire Sciences Laboratory. 
Available: http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/ [15 
Nov 2012]. 

Rose, R., C.E.C. Chachulski, and D.L. Haase. 1998. 
Propagation of Pacific Northwest Native Plants. 
Oregon State University Press, Corvallis, OR.  

St. John, H. 1963. Flora of Southeastern Washington and 

of Adjacent Idaho (3rd ed.). Outdoor Pictures, 
Escondido, CA. 

USDA NRCS. 2012. The PLANTS Database 

(http://plants.usda.gov, 15 Nov 2012). National Plant 
Data Team, Greensboro, NC. 

Young, J.A. and C.G. Young. 1992. Seeds of Woody 

Plants of North America. Dioscorides Press, Portland, 
OR. 

Zimmerman, G.T., and L.F. Neuenschwander. 1984. 

Livestock grazing influences on community 
structure, fire intensity, and fire frequency within the 
Douglas-fir/ninebark habitat type. J. of Range Mgmt. 
37(2):104-110. 

Prepared By 
Pamela L.S. Pavek, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Pullman, Washington  
 
David M. Skinner, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Pullman, Washington (retired) 

Citation 
Pavek, P.L.S. and D.M. Skinner. 2013. Plant guide for 
baldhip rose (Rosa gymnocarpa Nutt.). USDA Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Pullman, WA. 

Published March 2013 
Edited: 6Dec2012 dms; 26Feb2013 jab; 1Mar2013 plsp 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

