 
 

 

Plant Guide

Sites on the Plant Profile for this species for further 
information. 
 
Description 
General:Tall buttercup is a perennial that grows from a 
stout, abruptly ending root stock (praemorse). It has a 
short, thick rhizome capable of splitting to form daughter 
plants in clumps reaching about three feet (one meter) in 
diameter. There are thick roots on the underside of the 
rhizome and wiry, persistent fibers from the vascular 
bundles of decayed leaf petioles on the upper side. 
Axillary buds form on the rhizomes at the tightly spaced 
nodes from which the basal leaves grow.   
 
Basal leaves grow directly from the rhizome or root 
crown and have petioles up to eight inches in length. Leaf 
blades are one to three inches long, are broadly 
pentagonal in outline, but can also be ovate or heart-
shaped. They are more or less deeply divided into three 
palmate lobes that are each divided again two to three 
times into acute segments. There can be 40 to 50 basal 
leaves.   
 
Freely branching, erect flower stems are one to three feet 
(30 to 100 centimeters) tall, and there may be one to 
several stems per plant. Hairs on the stem are sparse to 
copious, and soft and spreading or appressed to the stem. 
Similar hairs are on the leaves, leaf petioles, and sepals. 
The stem leaves resemble the basal leaves but are smaller, 
alternate in arrangement along the stem and reduced 
upward to three- to five-lobed bracts. The upper leaves 
lack petioles.   
 
The regular flowers have radial symmetry and form on 
the branch ends in cymose inflorescences. Flower 
pedicels can be up to five inches long and are hairy. The 
five floral sepals are bent downward (reflexed), about 
one-quarter inch long, greenish, with long, soft, spreading 
hairs. The sepals shed early during flowering. There are 
usually five (but as many as eight) glossy petals which are 
typically bright yellow, but may be pale yellow or white. 
Each petal is approximately one-half inch long and 
roundish in shape. There is a nectary about one millimeter 
long at the base of the inner surface of the petal. Thirty to 
70 stamens surround the 15 to 40 pistils that are on a 
globe-shaped receptacle. The fruit is a small (two to three 
millimeters long), dry walled achene containing a single 
seed. Achenes are roundish, compressed, and smooth with 
a prominent keel and a hooked beak at the tip.  
Distribution: Tall buttercup is a perennial forb native to 
central and northeastern Europe where it is a weed of old 
pastures and hay meadows. In North America, it has been 
reported from all but eight states and provinces. For 

TALL BUTTERCUP 

Ranunculus acris L. 
Plant Symbol = RAAC3 

Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Montana State Office 

 Figure 1. Tall buttercup 
 
Alternate Names 
Meadow buttercup 
 
Uses 
In its native range of central and northeastern Europe, tall 
buttercup is considered a weed of old pastures and 
hayland. 
 
Status 
This plant can be weedy and invasive, and is listed as 
noxious in Montana. Please consult the PLANTS Web 
site and your State Department of Natural Resources for 
this plant’s current status (e.g., threatened or endangered 
species, state noxious status, and wetland indicator 
values). 
 
Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation 
if not properly managed. Please consult with your local 
NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service 
office, state natural resource, or state agriculture 
department regarding its status and use. Weed information 
is also available from the PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov. Please consult the Related Web 

 

current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page 
for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Life history: Tall buttercup is a true perennial, 
reproducing by both rhizomes and seeds. In late winter 
and early spring, 40 to 50 new leaves form rapidly at the 
apex of elongating rhizomes. After basal leaf formation, 
there is a leafy phase indicated by a delay between the 
growth of the last leaf and the growth of the flowering 
stem. Leaf area peaks at this time, and declines thereafter.   
 
Development of flower buds begins in late summer the 
year before flowering and is promoted by low winter 
temperatures. Flowering occurs in late spring, peaks in 
early summer, and typically lasts two months. The 
duration of flowering can be extended by high soil 
moisture. In Norway, flowering continued into early 
autumn, and in New Zealand flowering occurred all year. 
Seed set begins in late summer and continues into 
autumn. Cross pollination is required for seed production 
because pollen is produced after the stigmata of the same 
flower are receptive, thus seed set can be limited where 
pollinators are lacking. The basal leaves begin to die at 
flowering, and the flower stems die after flowering.   
 
When grown under cultivation, tall buttercup will flower 
in the first year. However, naturally growing plants may 
not flower until the second year or for up to 10 years. The 
reproductive potential does not decline with age at least 
up to 10 years. Flowering is reduced at high population 
densities. Plants flowering late in the season are less 
likely to flower the following year, most likely because of 
insufficient accumulation of energy reserves needed to 
flower. Tall buttercup generally has low fecundity, 
typically producing less than four flowers per plant. The 
exceptions are on sites with low species diversity or high 
soil fertility. 
 
Seed survival rate in the soil is generally less than two 
years. Seed bank studies indicate the proportional 
contribution of tall buttercup to the soil seed bank mimics 
its proportional contribution to the plant community. Seed 
bank densities have been reported at three seeds per 
square yard in Quebec, 300 seeds per square yard in 
England, to 2,600 seeds per square yard in a dense 
population in New Zealand. Most seeds accumulate in the 
top inch (2.5 centimeters) of the soil and are lost mainly 
through germination. Seeds buried deeper than one inch 
can survive longer than two years. One study found 20% 
of the seeds buried below 1.5 inches survived for 16 
years, and another study found seeds in the top 1.2 inches 
survived 10 years, even after tall buttercup had 
disappeared from the plant community. 
 
The survival of plants produced from rhizomes is also 
below one percent. There are variable reports on the 
lifespan of tall buttercup ranging from four years on the 
grasslands of Wales to 14 years in Russia.  
 

 

 

Response to Competition: The growth and reproduction of 
tall buttercup is reduced under plant competition. A field 
study in Sweden found tall buttercup production was 
greatly reduced when grown in species mixtures 
suggesting diverse plant communities may competitively 
suppress the weed. The investigators related this to the 
relatively small stature of tall buttercup (i.e., the basal 
leaves of tall buttercup were overtopped by taller growing 
grasses such as orchardgrass – Dactylis glomerata and 
reed canarygrass – Phalaris arundinacea). They also 
noted that tall buttercup did not respond to increased 
species richness by increasing its stature. However, it may 
adapt to low-light intensities by increasing light-
harvesting efficiencies under high-nitrogen conditions. 
Population increase by rhizome reproduction is a strategy 
of tall buttercup to reduce interspecific competition by 
excluding other species within a colony of ramets. 
 
Habitat: In its native range, tall buttercup is common and 
abundant in damp meadows and pastures on calcareous or 
neutral substrata. On the British Isles it is frequently 
found on rock ledges, gullies, and occasionally on 
mountain top detritus at elevations of 4,000 feet. On 
Dutch river flood plains, the habitat preference of tall 
buttercup is the intermediate position on the elevational 
gradient in a zone with approximately 30 days of flooding 
per year.  
 
Adaptation 
Tall buttercup can tolerate low-oxygen conditions created 
by flooding for 30 days by the formation of air storage 
aerenchyma cells in the roots. It is adapted to, and 
invasive in, moist fields, meadows, pastures, and 
grasslands, and in irrigated and sub-irrigated meadows. It 
has also been found along rivers, streams, and lakes; in 
borrow pits, along roads with gravely substrata, along 
irrigation ditches, in parking lots and in gravel pits. It has 
been collected from elevations as high as 8,400 feet 
(2,500 meters). 
 
Establishment 
Tall buttercup established both by seed and reproductive 
rhizomes. Many tall buttercup seeds germinate within 
their first year, but less than one percent of the seedlings 
survive. Survival increases under disturbance that 
removes neighboring vegetation. Both well-drained and 
waterlogged soil conditions reduce seedling recruitment. 
 
Rhizomes reproduce after flowering or removal of the 
flowering stem by cutting, defoliation, disease, livestock 
trampling, or other disturbances. Lateral buds on the 
rhizomes are released from the apical dominance of the 
main stem and grow to form new rhizomes that later 
separate from the parent. New shoots re-impose apical 
dominance over the remaining buds on the rhizome, 
ensuring a continuous supply of buds capable of 
regenerating new shoots. Regeneration from rhizomes is 
reduced in species-rich plant communities. 
 

Tall buttercup spreads short distances (three to five feet) 
by the splitting of rhizomes and seeds dropping from 
parent plants. Seeds have no mechanism for long distance 
dispersal other than the short-hooked beak at the tip of the 
achene which allows them to be carried long distances in 
the pelts of animals. Seed can also be transported in soil 
stuck to animal hooves, and when ingested, in the gut of 
grazing animals. A large portion of seeds fed to cows 
were still viable after being voided in dung, and one study 
estimated one cow could disperse about 9,400 seeds 
during a 165-day grazing season. Other long distance 
dispersal mechanisms include contaminated hay, farm 
equipment, water currents, clothing and shoes. 
 
Management 
See Control below. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Tall buttercup can be invasive. See Environmental 
concerns below. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
Tall buttercup is usually avoided by livestock because of 
the glycoside ranunculin, thereby reducing the grazing 
capacities of pastures. When ingested, it causes blistering 
of the lips and tongue, intestinal disorders, and ventricular 
fibrillation and respiratory failure, which can be fatal. 
Milk from dairy cattle that have eaten tall buttercup is 
bitter. This flavor can persist in butter made from the 
milk. Dense clones of tall buttercup crowd out native and 
non-native pasture plants reducing forage capacity and 
plant diversity. 
 
Control 
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use it safely.  Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method. Trade names 
and control measures appear in this document only to 
provide specific information. USDA NRCS does not 
guarantee or warranty the products and control methods 
named, and other products may be equally effective. 
 
Herbicides: Tall buttercup is listed on the Milestone® 
(aminopyralid) and Clarity® (dicamba) herbicide labels. 
Always check the herbicide label to confirm formulation 
and proper usage of the product before applying. Always 
follow label instructions to reduce toxicity or other 
unintended risks to humans and the environment, and to 
confirm potential grazing and re-planting restrictions. 
Optimum timing for herbicide application is during the 
leafy phase in late spring prior to flower-shoot growth. 
This is a period of active growth and the time of greatest 
leaf area for herbicide absorption. Tall buttercup 
populations resistant to the phenoxy herbicide MPCA 
have been found in New Zealand. To avoid the 
development of herbicide resistant populations, integrate 
herbicidal control with other control methods and use 
herbicides with different modes of action.      

 

 

Hand Pulling: Hand pulling and digging to extract all of 
the rootstock may be an effective method to temporally 
reduce small-scale infestations and scattered plants, either 
as new invaders or those persisting after herbicide 
treatments. However, any rhizomes left in the soil will 
regenerate into new plants and follow-up control will be 
needed to target those plants and plants regenerating from 
the soil seed bank. Pulling rosette and flowering plants 
will reduce seed set.  
 
Mowing: Mowing timing and frequency for tall buttercup 
management should promote competitiveness of desirable 
pasture plants and reduce tall buttercup flowering. For 
example, in red fescue dominated dry valley meadows in 
Russia, mowing reduced flowering of tall buttercup. 
Frequent mowing reduced the occurrence of tall buttercup 
in meadows and grasslands in Europe. However, frequent 
cuttings in Slovenia reduced the competitiveness of 
tussock grasses and enabled tall buttercup encroachment. 
 
Tilling: Rhizomes and seeds of tall buttercup can 
regenerate populations after tillage. The disturbance of 
tillage can create a favorable environment for tall 
buttercup growth and reproduction by reducing 
competitive perennial plants. Therefore, tillage has the 
potential to spread tall buttercup and is not recommended 
unless integrated with herbicide management and 
followed by revegetation with desired, competitive plants. 
 
Fertilization: Fertilizer applications to deteriorated 
pastures in Austria had little effect on the abundance of 
tall buttercup. However, other studies in Europe showed 
applications of nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium 
reduced the relative abundance of tall buttercup by 
increasing the proportion of palatable grasses. These 
contradictory results indicate there may be a trade-off 
between competitive suppression of tall buttercup and its 
ability to compensate for reduced light levels resulting 
from overtopping competitors. On cultivated pastures and 
hay meadows, nutrient management is important to 
maintaining the competitiveness of desired perennial 
grasses, but management of the competing plants to 
optimize their vigor is equally important. Nutrient 
management combined with judicious use of herbicides 
and crop rotation is recommended where tall buttercup 
invades non-native pastures and hay meadows. 
 
Grazing Management: Several studies suggest that tall 
buttercup increases with grazing. In northern Finland, tall 
buttercup increased when sheep were introduced into 
abandoned semi-natural grasslands. In Iceland, tall 
buttercup increased in fields that were grazed in the 
spring. In Britain, tall buttercup increased in abundance 
with pasture age, cropping for hay, and with overgrazing. 
In these studies, litter removal, exposure of bare ground, 
and suppression of competitive grasses were believed to 
facilitate the increase of tall buttercup. However, in New 
Zealand, tall buttercup was less prevalent in sheep 
pastures than in dairy pastures, but it is not clear if this is 

due to sheep grazing tall buttercup or the relative impact 
of the different management systems on other competitive 
pasture plants.   
 
Tall buttercup contains the glycoside ranunculin which 
deters grazing by livestock and, when ingested, causes 
potentially fatal disorders. Further studies are needed to 
determine the feasibility of using sheep or goats to control 
tall buttercup. However, prescribed grazing to promote 
the competitiveness of desirable pasture forage plants will 
prevent tall buttercup invasion and re-invasion after weed 
control. Spring grazing is not recommended because it is 
likely to favor tall buttercup by removing the shading 
canopy of competitive plants when tall buttercup leaf area 
is greatest. 
 
Biological Control: Tall buttercup is host to insects in its 
native range that may contribute to its population 
regulation. However, at this time, there are no insects 
available as biological control agents in North America. 
Tall buttercup is host to the naturally occurring soil 
fungus, Sclerotinia sclerotiorum. A New Zealand study 
found one virulent isolate of Sclerotinia temporarily 
reduced tall buttercup total dry weight by 57 percent, 
suggesting this pathogen may reduce the invasiveness of 
this weed. 
 
Integrated Pest Management (IPM): Tall buttercup is 
predominantly a weed problem on moist hay meadows 
and pastures. For severe infestations, the goal of 
integrated weed management is to increase the time 
intervals between initial herbicidal control and subsequent 
reapplications. This is best accomplished by encouraging 
a diverse plant community with a strong component of 
grasses with tall stature. Prescribed grazing to maintain 
vigorous grasses is fundamental and spring grazing is 
discouraged to ensure a shading canopy when tall 
buttercup leaf area peaks. On decadent meadows and 
pastures, apply crop rotation to provide weed control and 
to re-establish vigorous grass and legume hay and pasture 
species. On irrigated pastures and hay meadows, flooding 
is discouraged as it will favor tall buttercup over less 
flood-adapted grasses. Nutrient management should avoid 
over application of nutrients as high nutrients may 
facilitate the adaptation of tall buttercup to photosynthesis 
under low-light conditions of a shading canopy. Persistent 
hand pulling and grubbing of rhizomes may be substituted 
for herbicide application on small patches. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) N/A 
 

 

 

References 
Bourdôt, G.W., G.A. Hurrell and D.J. Saville. 1990. 

Variation in MCPA-resistance in Ranunculus acris L. 
subsp. acris and its correlation with historical 
exposure to MCPA. Weed Research 30: 449-457. 

Cornwallis, L.J., A. Stewart, G.W. Bourdôt, R.E. Gaunt, 
I.C. Harvey and D.J. Saville. 1999. Pathogenicity of 
Sclerotinia sclerotiorum on Ranunculus acris in 
Dairy Pasture. Biocontrol Science and Technology 9: 
365-377. 

He, J.B., G.M. Bögemann, H.M. van de Steeh, J.G.H.M. 
Rijnders, L.A.C.J. Voesenek, and C.W.P.M. Blom. 
1999. Survival tactics of Ranunculus species in river 
flood plains.  Oecologia 118: 1-8. 

Jumpponen, A., C.P.H. Mulder, K. Huss-Danell, and P. 
Högberg. 2005. Winners and losers in herbaceous 
plant communities: insights from folier carbon 
isotope composition in monocultures and mixtures. 
Journal of Ecology 93: 1136-1147. 

Lamoureaux, S.L. and G.W. Bourdôt. 2007. A review of 

the ecology and management of Ranunculus acris 
subsp. acris in pasture. AgResearch Weed Research 
47: 461-471. 

 
Prepared By 
Jim.  Jacobs 
USDA-NRCS, Montana State Office, Bozeman, Montana 
 
Melissa Graves 
Montana State University, Bozeman, Montana 
 
Jane Mangold 
Montana State University, Bozeman, Montana 
 
Citation 
Jacobs, J., M. Graves, and J. Mangold. 2010. Plant guide 
for tall buttercup (Ranunculus acris L.). USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Montana State Office. 
Bozeman, Montana 59715. 
 

Published October, 2010 

Edited:  

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

