 
 

 

Plant Guide

Ornamental: Gardeners may like to add this early-
blooming pollinator plant to their garden to draw 
beneficial insects and add diversity to their landscape. 

Ethnobotany 
Western buttercup has been noted as an important species 
to tribes throughout its range.  In northern California and 
southern Oregon, its blooms are said to mark the coming 
of the summer salmon runs.  Many tribes ground the 
seeds of the buttercup and mixed them with other seeds to 
make pinole (a flour-like staple), and the Aleut noted the 
juices of its blooms are poisonous (Moermon, 2012). 

Status 
Ranunculus occidentalis is a facultative wetland species, 
meaning throughout most of its native range it occurs in 
moist wetland areas or vernal pools, but also sometimes 
occurs in uplands.  Please consult the PLANTS Web site 
and your State Department of Natural Resources for this 
plant’s current status (e.g., threatened or endangered 
species, state noxious status, and wetland indicator 
values). 

Description 
General: Western buttercup is a common, perennial, 
native forb/herb in the crowfoot or buttercup family 
(Ranunculaceae).  Its traits are fairly variable and its 
many varieties are easily mistaken for other native and 
non-native buttercups.  Plant stems are erect and grow to 
be from 6 inches to 2.5 feet tall, and have wedge-like, 
three-lobed leaves at the base.  Basal leaves typically 
range from ¾ to 2 inches (2–5 cm) long by ¾ to 3 inches 
(2–8 cm) wide, and stem leaves stay low to the base of the 
plant, are few, lobed, and branched (Whittemore, 2012).  
They mature and bloom as early as March, continuing 
through July or August depending on variety, latitude, and 
elevation, with yellow flowers having 5 to 14 short, broad 
petals that are 1/16 to 5/16 inch (2–8 mm) wide by 3/16 to 
1/2 inch (5–13 mm) in length.  Flower petals are fewer 
and shorter when compared to the 9–16 longer petals of 
other species.  Seeds are 1/16 to 1/8 inch (2–3 mm) in 
circumference, flat, disc-shaped, and have a small 
protruding beak from one edge (Figure 3). 
There are several varieties of western buttercup, some of 
which intergrade or overlap in their distribution, and 
which are sometimes difficult to distinguish due to the 
large geographical distribution of the species, and slight 
variations within and among varieties.  Botanists currently 
recognize between four (USDA-NRCS, 2012) and seven 
(Torrey and Gray, 1997) varieties of R. occidentalis. 
R. occidentalis is very closely related to California 
buttercup (R. californicus), and in early phases can also 
be confused with the invasive creeping buttercup (R.  

WESTERN BUTTERCUP 
Ranunculus occidentalis Nutt. 

Plant Symbol = RAOC 

Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials 
Center, Oregon 

Photo by Amy Bartow, NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials Center, 2008 

 

Alternate Names 
Alternate Common Names:  western field buttercup 
Alternate Scientific Names:  none 

Uses 
Pollinator habitat: Western buttercup is an early 
blooming plant making it a suitable pollen and nectar 
source for early season pollinators.  Attracting pollinators 
is not just advantageous for crop productivity, it is 
essential for many food crops.  Bees especially are 
attracted to the bright yellow blooms that are one of the 
first to appear in the spring (Ley et al., 2012). 
Restoration: This plant is a great choice for wetland 
prairie restoration throughout its range.  Its versatility 
enables it to thrive in moist upland or lowland sites as a 
quickly establishing native (Stanley et al., 2010). 

 

 

 

 

 
Figure 1. R. repens (left) and R. occidentalis (right) receptacle views.  
Photo courtesy of G.D. Carr, Oregon Flora Image Project. 2007, 2008. 
repens).  The non-native creeping buttercup (R. repens) 
frequents similar habitats and is undesirable due to its 
invasive status and weediness (Ball et al., 2006).  Because 
this species has such a broad distribution and multiple 
varieties, it is commonly misidentified.  Generally, R. 
repens tends to stay close to the ground, bunch together, 
and “creep,” but this characteristic alone is not a reliable 
way to differentiate, since R. occidentalis can also keep a 
low profile under certain environmental conditions.  If the 
plants are in bloom, petals of the western buttercup are 
more pointed and not so overlapped as the rounder and 
fuller petals of the creeping buttercup, and the receptacle 
(stem and base under the flower) of the creeping 
buttercup is fuzzy or hairy while the western is smooth 
(Figure 2).  When not in bloom the dark green leaves of 
R. repens have light patches or spots that R. occidentalis 
leaves do not. 
Distribution:  This species is found from sea level to 
7,000 ft elevations in western North America, from 
California and western Nevada north through western 
Canada and into Alaska.  For current distribution, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 
Habitat:  R. occidentalis prefers seasonally moist soils in 
a variety of habitats from coastal prairies and bluffs to 
disturbed areas, meadows, and forested areas (Turner and 
Gustafson, 2006).  It is generally associated with wetland 
areas, although it will tolerate seasonal drought and is also 
found in non-wetland sites. 
Adaptation 
While western buttercup prefers vernal pools and wetland 
sites, it will also tolerate drier upland sites away from the 
coast that retain seasonally moist soils.  It also does quite 
well in plant and seed production fields, tolerating all soil 
types and a range of pH values. 
Establishment 
Seeds germinate best at cool temperatures (50–60°F) and 
stands are best established by directly sowing in the fall; 
alternately, plugs can be transplanted in the fall.  
Broadcast at a single species application rate of 6 to 7 
pounds pure live seed (pls) per acre.  Western buttercup 
has approximately 200,000 seeds per pound, so applying 
seed at a rate of one pound per acre will result in about 5 
seeds per square foot.   Germination begins 5 to 6 weeks 
after fall sowing.  The plants will grow throughout winter, 

 

Figure 2. Western buttercup seedlings sprouting at the Corvallis Plant 
Materials Center. Photo by Amy Bartow, NRCS, 2008. 
flowering and producing seed the first spring.  Western 
buttercup goes dormant in the summer after setting seed, 
and re-emerges in the fall after the first rains. 
Management 
Once established in an appropriate environment, this 
species is relatively low-maintenance.  On a restoration 
site, it is not aggressive and unlikely to dominate and 
become weedy like some other Ranunculus species.  It 
can tolerate herbicide application during its late summer 
dormancy, and would likely benefit from mowing in late 
summer (Bartow, 2012) to reduce non-native competition 
on a restoration site (Stanley et al., 2010). 
Pests and Potential Problems 
This is a hardy plant with few, if any, susceptibilities to 
disease or pests. 
Environmental Concerns 
The fresh leaves, stems, and flower sap of other members 
of the Ranunculus genus have been found to cause 
digestive or nervous system problems for livestock 
grazing in buttercup-dominated areas (Youngen, 2012).  
However, due to its bitter taste most animals avoid eating 
it, especially when other feed sources are available, 
making it unlikely to be ingested (Goetz et al., 2012).  
There is no indication that the consumption of dried 
plants (such as in hay) cause problems because as it dries, 
the toxic residue evaporates (Youngen, 2012).  No 
specific studies have been done on the toxicity of R. 
occidentalis. 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Field Establishment & Management: There are limited 
labeled herbicides appropriate for forb species in seed 
production; therefore, a weed free seedbed is very 
important.  At the Corvallis PMC, fields are drill planted 
at a rate of 6 to 7 lb pls/acre at a depth of 1/8 to 1/4 inch 
with row spacing of 10 to 14 inches.  When establishing a 
field with transplants, plugs can be planted as close as 1ft 
centers as plants do not take up much space, but row 
spacing should be planned to accommodate cultivation 
and harvest equipment.  It is beneficial to fertilize a well-
established field in the early spring, Western buttercup 
has tolerated a broadleaf herbicide spray during its 
summer dormancy, allowing a window of time for weed 
management before the plants resume growth in the fall. 
Otherwise, glyphosate spot-spraying or hand weeding 
methods are most effective.  This species is very prolific 

 

and will bloom and produce seed the first year.  
Depending on site conditions, fields can last from 3 to 5 
years.     
Seed Harvest: A flail vacuum type seed stripper works 
well to harvest all green and mature seed from the stem, 
but the fragile nature of the stems only allows a single 
harvest of the field.  Due to uneven field maturation and 
seed-shatter, the highest yields may be seen on plots 
grown on weed fabric.  This technique allows for the 
latest possible field harvest as the fabric will catch earlier 
shattering seed, which can then be vacuumed or swept 
post-harvest.     
Seed Conditioning: Harvested materials should be 
thoroughly dried before beginning the cleaning process.  
An air-screen machine will easily separate seed from 
other organic debris in the harvested lot.  Average seed 
yields at the Corvallis Plant Materials Center are between 
60 and 80 pounds per acre using weed fabric. 

 

Figure 3. Western buttercup seeds at the Corvallis PMC, 2012. 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
There are no improved cultivars of western buttercup, but 
seed is sometimes available from commercial growers in 
the Pacific Northwest. 
References 
Ball, D.A., et al. 2006. Weeds of the west. Western Soc. 

of Weed Science, Univ. of Wyoming, Jackson. 

Bartow, A. 2012. The 2011 US Fish and Wildlife Service 
annual report. USDA-NRCS, Plant Materials Center, 
Corvallis, OR. 

Carr, G.D. Ranunculus occidentalis and Ranunculus 

repens. Oregon Flora Image Project. 
http://www.botany.hawaii.edu/faculty/carr/ofp/ofp_in
ind.htm (accessed 30 Aug. 2012). 

Goetz, J., T.N. Jordan, J.W. McCain, and N.Y. Su. 2012. 

Indiana plants poisonous to livestock and pets: 
buttercups. Cooperative Extension Service, Purdue 
Univ., West Lafayette, IN. 
http://www.vet.purdue.edu/toxic/plant30.htm 
(accessed 30 Mar. 2012).  

Ley, E.L., S. Buchmann, K. McGuire, and R. Holmes. 
2012. Selecting plants for pollinators: a regional 
guide for farmers, land managers, and gardeners in 
the Pacific Lowland Mixed Forest Province. 
Pollinator Partnership and the North American 
Pollinator Protection Campaign, San Francisco. 
http://pollinator.org/PDFs/Guides/PacificLowlandrx9
FINAL.pdf (accessed 30 Mar. 2012).  

Moerman, D. 2012. Ranunculus occidentalis. In: Native 
American Ethnobotany Database [Online]. Univ. of 
Michigan, Dearborn. http://herb.umd.umich.edu/ 
herb/search.pl (accessed 1 May 2012). 

Stanley, A.G., T.N. Kaye, and P.W. Dunwiddie. 2010. 
Regional strategies for restoring invaded prairies, 
final technical report. Institute for Applied Ecology, 
Corvallis, OR and The Nature Conservancy, Seattle, 
WA. http://appliedeco.org/reports/default-page#rare-
plant-species-research (accessed 3 May 2012). 

Torrey, J., and A. Gray. 2012. Ranunculus occidentalis. 

Flora of North America. 
http://www.efloras.org/florataxon.aspx?flora_id=1&t
axon_id=233501179 (accessed May 2012). 

Turner, M., and P. Gustafson. 2006. Wildflowers of the 

Pacific Northwest. Timber Press, Portland, OR. 

USDA-NRCS. 2012. The PLANTS Database. National 

Plant Data Team, Greensboro, NC. 
http://plants.usda.gov (3 May 2012).  

Whittemore, A.T. 2012 (v. 1.0). Jepson eFlora, 

Ranunculus occidentalis, Jepson Flora Project. 
http://ucjeps.berkeley.edu/IJM.html (accessed 3 May 
2012). 

Youngen, G. 2012. Plants toxic to animals: buttercup. 

Veterinary Medicine Library, Univ. of Illinois, 
Urbana-Champaign. 
http://www.library.illinois.edu/vex/toxic/butcup/butc
up.htm (accessed 30 Mar. 2012). 

Prepared By:  Mary Beuthin, USDA-NRCS Corvallis 
Plant Materials Center, Oregon 
Citation 
Beuthin, M. 2012. Plant Guide for western buttercup 
(Ranunculus occidentalis). USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Plant Mat.Center, Corvallis, OR. 
Published October 2012 
Edited: 03May2012 aym; 06Nov2012jab 
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov.   

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

