NOOTKA ROSE 
Rosa nutkana C. Presl 

Plant Symbol = RONU 

Contributed by:  NRCS Plant Materials Center, Pullman, 
Washington 

Rosa nutkana flower. Ben Legler, University of Washington 
Burke Museum of Natural History and Culture 

 

Alternate Names 
Alternate Common Names: bristly Nootka rose, 
Spalding’s rose  
 
Alternate Scientific Names:  R. anatonensis St. John, R. 
caeruleomontana St. John, R. columbiana Rybd., R. 
durandii Crepin, R. jonesii St. John, R. macdougali Holz., 
R. megalantha G.N. Jones, R. muriculata Greene, R. 
rainierensis G.N. Jones, R. spaldingii Crepin (Hitchcock 
et al., 1969; USDA ARS, 2012) 

Uses 
Ornamental: Nootka rose is an attractive shrub that can 
be incorporated into landscaped areas.  It should be 
planted where its spread by rhizomes and suckers will not 
be a problem. 
 
Pollinators and Beneficial Insects:  Roses produce small 
amounts of nectar, so the primary insect pollinators of 
roses are bees gathering pollen (Mader et al., 2011).  The 
open-faced flowers of native roses are more attractive to 

 

 

Plant Guide

 

pollinators than non-native cultivars with double flowers 
(Mader et al., 2011). 
 
Wildlife: Nootka rose fruits (hips) remain on the plant 
throughout the winter, and are eaten by small mammals, 
birds and insects.  Rosa species are important browse for 
Rocky Mountain elk in summer, but the use is lower in 
fall and winter (Kufeld, 1973).  Deer also browse leaves 
and young shoots (Parish et al., 1996). 
 
Livestock:  Livestock browse Nootka rose leaves and 
young shoots (Parish et al., 1996). 
 
Ethnobotanical: Native Americans throughout the Pacific 
Northwest and Rocky Mountain region used Nootka rose 
as food, medicine, and for ceremonial purposes 
(Moerman, 2012).  Hips of all wild roses are high in 
vitamin C and are made into jams, jellies, syrups and teas.   
 
Revegetation:  Nootka rose produces extensive rhizomes 
and grows rapidly, making it an ideal plant for 
revegetation projects.  It is used to control soil erosion on 
hillsides, road cuts and streambanks. 
 

Rosa nutkana flower. Ben Legler, University of Washington 
Burke Museum of Natural History and Culture 

 

 
 

 

Status 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State Department 
of Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values). 

Description 
General:  Rose family (Rosaceae).  Rosa nutkana is an 
erect to spreading, long-lived shrub native to the western 
U.S. and Canada.  It grows 1 to 9 feet tall and forms loose 
thickets.  Stems are slender, often very dark brown to 
black.  All subspecies except subsp. melina typically have 
straight thorns, or are sometimes unarmed.  Subsp. melina 
typically has curved thorns.  The thorns are often in pairs 
at the base of each leaf.  Leaves are alternate, deciduous, 
and odd-pinnate with 5 to 9 leaflets.  Leaflets are elliptic 
to elliptic-ovate with serrated to multi-serrated margins.  
Flowers occur at the ends of branches, bloom May 
through July, and are usually solitary and large.  Petals are 
1 to 1.6 inches long, light to dark pink, and have broad 
notches.  Sepals are restricted in the middle, then 
expanded toward the tip and are nearly as long as the 
petals.  Flowers have numerous stamens and pistils, and 
the styles are deciduous as the fruit matures.  The fruit is a 
round to pear-shaped hypanthium (hip) 0.5 to 0.8 inch 
wide.  It matures in August to September, is bright red to 
reddish purple, and has persistent sepals.  The fruit 
contains numerous seeds that are angled achenes.  The 
plant reproduces sexually by seed and vegetatively by 
sprouts, rhizomes and layering.  (Hitchcock and 
Cronquist, 1973; Young and Young, 1992; Parish et al., 
1996; Lewis and Ertter, 2007; Burke Museum of Natural 
History and Culture, 2012; Turner, 2012). 

Rosa nutkana pedicel and sepals. Ben Legler, University of 
Washington Burke Museum of Natural History and Culture 

 

 

Rosa is a complex and variable genus which hybridizes 
freely and sometimes exhibits polyploidy and/or apomixis 
(Hitchcock, et al., 1969).  Hybridization may occur 
between Rosa nutkana and other native roses, R. woodsii 
(Woods’ rose) and R. gymnocarpa (baldhip rose) (Turner, 
2012). 
 
The genus name Rosa is an ancient Latin name for rose 
(St. John, 1963).  The species name nutkana refers to the 
Nootka Sound on the west coast of Vancouver Island, BC 
(Charters, 2012). 
 
Distribution:  Rosa nutkana grows in the western U.S., 
from the Rocky Mountain states to the Pacific Coast, and 
in British Columbia and Alaska.  The genus is divided 
into three subspecies:  subsp. melina grows at high 
elevations (7500 to 11,400 feet) in the southern Rocky 
Mountains of Colorado, New Mexico and Utah and is rare 
in Montana, Wyoming and southern Idaho; subsp. 
macdougalii grows at elevations below 7,500 feet in the 
intermontane area between the Rocky Mountains and 
Cascade Mountains from Colorado and Utah to central 
British Columbia; and subsp. nutkana grows at elevations 
below 7,500 feet west of the Cascade Mountains, along 
the Pacific Coast from northern California to Alaska 
(Lewis and Ertter, 2007).  For current distribution, consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS 
Web site. 
 
Habitat:  Rosa nutkana is an understory plant in dry and 
moist forest communities, including Douglas-fir 
(Pseudotsuga menziesii), ponderosa pine (Pinus 
ponderosa), mountain hemlock (Tsuga mertensiana), 
Sitka spruce (Picea sitchensis), lodgepole pine (Pinus 
contorta), redwood (Sequoia sempervirens) and western 
hardwoods (Reed, 1993).  It also grows in sagebrush 
(Artemisia spp.), and in mountain and plains grasslands 
(Reed, 1993).  It is often found in association with red-
osier dogwood (Cornus sericea), quaking aspen (Populus 
tremuloides), black cottonwood (Populus trichocarpa) 
and snowberry (Symphoricarpos albus) (Aller et al., 
1981; Bell et al., 1992). 

Adaptation 
This plant is adapted to medium and fine textured soils 
with neutral pH (USDA NRCS, 2012).  It can tolerate low 
levels of fertility but does not tolerate drought (USDA 
NRCS, 2012).  It grows in open and shaded areas 
receiving 18 to 125 inches of annual precipitation.  The 
subspecies macdougalii and nutkana grow at low to 
moderate elevations up to 7,500 feet, and the subspecies 
melina grows at high elevations, 7,500 to 11,400 feet 
(Lewis and Ertter, 2007).  The plant will recover after a 
fire, however multiple fires will significantly reduce a 
population (Reed, 1993).   

Establishment 
Freshly cleaned Nootka rose seed can be broadcast or 
drilled and covered with firm soil and mulch (Young and 

Young, 1992).  Dried seed needs a cold stratification 
period of 90 days for optimal germination.  Plants can 
also be established by transplanting seedlings or cuttings 
(see the Seeds and Plant Production section, below). 

Pests and Potential Problems 
None known 

Environmental Concerns 
None 

Rosa nutkana thorns. Ben Legler, University of Washington 
Burke Museum of Natural History and Culture 

 

Seeds and Plant Production 
Rosa nutkana plants are sexually reproductive after 2 to 5 
years of growth (Reed, 1993).  Seed is obtained by 
collecting rose hips after they turn a bright red color (Gill 
and Pogge, 1974).  The seeds can be removed from the 
hip flesh by macerating the hips in water and allowing the 
debris to float to the surface.  Seeds collected soon after 
ripening and not allowed to dry will be less dormant than 
dried seeds (Gill and Pogge, 1974; Young and Young, 
1992). Dried seeds require a cold stratification period of 
90 days to improve germination (Gill and Pogge, 1974; 
USDA NRCS, 2012).  Dried seeds stored in air-tight 
containers will remain viable for 2 to 4 years (Young and 
Young, 1992).  There are about 45,000 seeds per pound 
(USDA NRCS, 2012).   
 
Plants can be produced by sowing seed into pots or flats 
in October or November, then moving into a greenhouse 
in January or February.  Seedlings should be moved to a 
lath house or other structure in the spring and grown for 
one year to develop an adequate root system before 
transplanting.  
 
Nootka rose can also be reproduced by cuttings, root 
suckers or layering.  All seedlings and propagated plants 
should be hardened off for two to four weeks prior to 
transplanting in the desired field location. 

 

 

 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
None, but seeds and seedlings are commercially available. 

References 
Aller, A.R., M.A. Fosberg, M.C. LaZelle, and A.L. Falen. 
1981. Plant communities and soils of north slopes in 
the Palouse region of eastern Washington and 
northern Idaho. Northwest Sci. 55(4):248-262. 

Bell, J.H., J.L. Lauer, and J.M. Peek. 1992. Habitat use 

patterns of white-tailed deer, Umatilla River, Oregon. 
Northwest Sci. 66(3):160-171. 

Burke Museum of Natural History and Culture.  [Online]. 

Available at 
http://biology.burke.washington.edu/herbarium/imag
ecollection.php (accessed 15 Nov 2012). University 
of Washington, Seattle, WA. 

Charters, M.L. 2012.  California Plant Names: Latin and 

Greek Meanings and Derivations.  Available at 
http://www.calflora.net/botanicalnames/ (accessed 27 
Nov 2012) Michael L. Charters, Sierra Madre, CA.  
Gill, J.D. and F.L. Pogge. 1974. Rosa L. Rose. In: Seeds 

of Woody Plants of the United States. Agriculture 
Handbook No. 450. USDA Forest Service, 
Washington, D.C.  

Hitchcock, C.L., A. Cronquist, M. Ownbey, and J.W. 
Thompson. 1969. Vascular Plants of the Pacific 
Northwest. University of Washington Press, Seattle 
and London. 

Hitchcock, C.L. and A. Cronquist. 1973. Flora of the 

Pacific Northwest. University of Washington Press, 
Seattle and London. 

Kufeld, R. 1973. Foods eaten by the Rocky Mountain elk. 

J. of Range Mgmt. 26:106-113. 

Lewis, W.H. and B.E. Ertter. 2007. Subspecies of Rosa 

nutkana and R. woodsii (Rosaceae) in Western North 
America. Novon 17:341-353. 

Mader, E., M. Shepherd., M. Vaughan, S.H. Black, and 

G. LeBuhn. 2011. Attracting Native Pollinators. The 
Xerces Society.  Storey Publishing, North Adams, 
MA. 

Moerman, D. 2012. Native American Ethnobotany 

Database. Available at http://herb.umd.umich.edu/  
(accessed 29 Nov 2012) University of Michigan-
Dearborn, Dearborn, MI. 

Parish, R., R. Coupe, and D. Lloyd (eds.) 1996. Plants of  

Southern Interior British Columbia and the Inland 
Northwest. Lone Pine Publishing, Vancouver, BC. 

Reed, W.R. 1993. Rosa nutkana. In: Fire Effects 

 

Information System. Available at 
http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/ (accessed 28 Nov 
2012) U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fire 
Sciences Laboratory. 

St. John, H. 1963. Flora of Southeastern Washington and 

of Adjacent Idaho (3rd ed.). Outdoor Pictures, 
Escondido, CA. 

Turner, M. 2012. Pacific Northwest Wildflowers. 

Available at 

http://www.pnwflowers.com/flower/rosa-nutkana 
(accessed 30 Nov 2012) Turner Photographics, 
Bellingham, WA. 

USDA ARS, National Genetic Resources Program, 

Germplasm Resources Information Network (GRIN). 
2012. Available at http://www.ars-grin.gov/cgi-
bin/npgs/html/taxon.pl?5309 (accessed 28 Nov 
2012). National Germplasm Resources Laboratory, 
Beltsville, Maryland. 

USDA NRCS. 2012. The PLANTS Database 

(http://plants.usda.gov, 15 Nov 2012). National Plant 
Data Team, Greensboro, NC. 

Young, J.A. and C.G. Young. 1992. Seeds of Woody 

Plants of North America. Dioscorides Press, Portland, 
OR. 

Prepared By 
Pamela L.S. Pavek, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Pullman, Washington  
 
David M. Skinner, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Pullman, Washington (retired) 

Citation 
Pavek, P.L.S. and D.M. Skinner. 2013. Plant guide for 
Nootka rose (Rosa nutkana C. Presl). USDA Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Pullman, WA. 

Published March 2013 
Edited: 17Dec2012 dms; 14Jan2013 plsp; 26Feb2013 jab 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

