 
 

 

Plant Guide

listed endangered by the USDI Fish and Wildlife Service 
(1989) when it was known from a single 0.004 ha (0.01 
ac) population which numbered approximately 20 
individuals.  
 
The species has been assigned a recovery priority of 6 
indicating it as a subspecies with a high degree of threat 
and low recovery potential (USDI-FWS 1991). In 1989 
The Nature Conservancy purchased a 44 acre tract of land 
encompassing the existing population and excluding 
domestic livestock grazing. Since that time, two 
additional small populations have been discovered within 
the Nature Conservancy’s parcel. As of 1991 there were 
an estimated 200 individual plants (USDI FWS 1991). 
 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State Department 
of Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General: Buttercup family (Ranunculaceae). Autumn 
buttercup is a short-lived perennial forb from 0.2 to 0.5 m 
tall. Basal leaf blades are simple with three main lobes 
which are notched or lobed at the tips. The petioles (leaf 
stalks) are 3 to 15 cm (1.8 to 5.9 in) long. The plant bears 
yellow flowers with 5 petals which are approximately 1 
cm long (Welsh et al. 2003). 
 
Distribution: 
Autumn buttercup is known from a small area along the 
Sevier River north of Panguitch, Utah at 1950 m (6400 ft) 
in elevation. Other similar habitats in surrounding areas 
are held by private land owners and have not been 
thoroughly investigated botanically (Welsh et al. 2003). 
For current distribution, consult the Plant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Habitat:  
The known populations exist in wet saline meadows 
consisting of sedges, rushes and grasses. Dominant 
species in the community include wiregrass (Juncus 
arcticus), sea milkwort (Glaux maritima) and Nebraska 
sedge (Carex nebrascensis). The site was historically 
grazed by livestock until 1988 (Spence 1996).  
 
Adaptation 
This species is adapted to wet meadows at the transition 
zone between Carex dominated communities and dry 
upland meadows.  
 
Management 
Early researchers assumed that grazing by domestic 
livestock was a major threat to autumn buttercup and 

AUTUMN BUTTERCUP 

Ranunculus aestivalis (L.S. 

Benson) Van Buren & Harper 

Plant Symbol = RAAE 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Idaho Plant Materials 
Program 
 

 

Figure 1. Fall buttercup (Ranunculus aestivalis). Photo from UTDNR 
(2010). 

 
Alternate Names 
Fall buttercup 
R. acriformis var. aestivalis 
R. acris var. aestivalis 
 
Uses 
There are no known human uses associated with autumn 
buttercup. It is grazed by cattle and eaten by small 
mammals. 
 
Status 
Autumn buttercup was first collected in 1894 by Marcus 
E. Jones in Garfield County, UT. It was later recollected 
and described as a new species by Benson in 1948. 
Surveys made in the 1970s could not locate any plants at 
the original localities and the species was believed to have 
gone extinct until 1982 when a small population was 
discovered 1.6 km (1 mi) from the original collection 
location. Monitoring from 1983 through 1989 showed a 
90 percent decrease in individuals, going from over 400 
individuals to approximately 20 as a result of continued 
grazing and habitat modification. Autumn buttercup was 

 

 

contributed to its decline (USDI FWS 1989; USDI FWS 
1991). However; since the exclusion of livestock to 
autumn buttercup population sites, numbers have 
continued to drop (Spence 1996). From these 
observations, Spence (1996) developed two hypotheses 
for the decrease in individuals at the Nature Conservancy 
Preserve: 1) decrease in moisture levels and 2) the 
ABSENCE of grazing. Diversion of springs that sub-
irrigate the monitored stand and nearby prospective 
reintroduction sites may have caused a plant community 
shift which favors other plant species over autumn 
buttercup. Additionally, disturbance caused by cattle 
grazing may have opened sites for autumn buttercup to 
grow large enough to flower and spread. In the absence of 
disturbance, other quickly spreading species such as 
wiregrass would have a competitive advantage. 
 
USDI FWS goals for the species include developing a 
habitat management plan, and conducting population 
monitoring studies (1991). There are also plans to 
inventory potential habitat to find unknown populations 
and suitable habitat for beginning new populations. Plant 
reproduction and establishment studies are also indicated. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no known pests or potential problems 
associated with autumn buttercup. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
There are no known environmental concerns associated 
with autumn buttercup. 
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Methods for propagating Autumn buttercup have been 
developed, using tissue cultures started from seedlings.  
Plants produced in this project have been used to augment 
a declining population of this species in Utah (CREW 
2010). 
 
References 
Center for Conservation of Endangered Wildlife. 2010. 

Autumn buttercup [Online]. Available at  
http://www.cincinnatizoo.org/earth/CREW/AutuAutu
mnButte.html. (accessed 20 Apr 2010). Cincinnati 
Zoo and Botanical Gardens. Cincinnati, OH. 

USDI-Fish and Wildlife Service. 1989. Endangered and 

threatened wildlife and plants: final rule to determine 
a “Ranunculus acriformis” var. “aestivalis” (autumn 
buttercup) to be endangered. Federal Register. 54 
(139): 30550-30554. 

USDI-Fish and Wildlife Service. 1991. Autumn buttercup 
(Ranunculus acriformis var. aestivalis) recovery plan. 
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Denver, CO. 20p. 

Utah Division of Natural Resources. 2010. Autumn 

buttercup [Online]. Available at 
http://dwrcdc.nr.utah.gov/rsgis2/Search/Display.asp?
FlNm=ranuaest/ (accessed 20 Apr 2010). UTDWR, 
Salt Lake City, UT. 

Welsh, S.L., N.D. Atwood, S. Goodrich, and L.C. 

Higgins. 2003. A Utah Flora. Third Edition, revised. 
Brigham Young University, Provo, UT. 

 
Prepared By 
Derek Tilley; USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho. 
 
Loren St. John, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho. 
 
Dan Ogle, USDA NRCS State Office, Boise, Idaho. 
 
Citation 
Tilley, D., St. John, L. and D. Ogle. 2010. Plant guide for 
autumn buttercup (Ranunculus aestivalis). USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Idaho Plant Materials 
Center. Aberdeen, ID. 
 
Published:  November 2010 
 
Edited: 20Apr2010djt 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

