 
 

 

Plant Guide

Weediness  
This plant does not sucker, but seedlings may establish 
off-site from seed spread by birds. Please consult with 
your local NRCS field office, Cooperative Extension 
Service office, State natural resource, or State agriculture 
department regarding its status and use.  Weed 
information is also available from the PLANTS Web site 
at plants.usda.gov.  Please consult the Related Web Sites 
on the Plant Profile for this species for further 
information.  
  
Description  
General: American black currant is a native shrub species 
three to six feet tall with erect branches lacking spines, on 
multiple stems.  The simple, alternate leaves are one to 
three inches wide and gland-dotted beneath with three to 
five lobes.  The glands are golden-yellow in color 
(Stephens, 1973).  Small flowers open in May and have 
five white petals.  In central North Dakota, the median 
date for full flowering is May 21, with an average 
flowering period of 22 days (Callow et al., 1992).  In 
Illinois, the tubular flowers are visited by bumblebees 
which suck nectar and sweat bees which collect pollen 
(Hilty). Drooping racemes produce glossy, red-purple to 
nearly black fruit (¼ to ½ inch in diameter) in August-
September.  The globose berries are smooth and contain 
many seeds.  Ripe fruits are sweet and desirable for 
human consumption.  They are commonly eaten by birds 
and small mammals through the fall season.  Propagation 
is primarily from seed with some possible layering and 
basal sprouting.  American black currant may form open 
thickets, but does not spread by suckering.  Seedling vigor 
is good, and growth rate is medium.  Lifespan is 
considered short to medium.  It has moderate flood 
tolerance, and is considered highly drought tolerant.  It 
occurs naturally as an understory species and is shade 
tolerant.  It is rated high in palatability by browsing 
animals, but the evaluation plots in North Dakota showed 
little damage.  Chromosome number is x=8 and the 
photosynthetic pathway is C3
 
Distribution: This species occurs from New Brunswick 
west to Alberta, south to Delaware, West Virginia, 
Indiana, Iowa, Nebraska, Colorado, and New Mexico.  
For current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Habitat: American black currant occurs primarily along 
stream banks and in moist ravines, but also in wet 
meadows, floodplains, and woodland edges (Larson and 
Johnson, 1999).  
  
 

. 

 

AMERICAN BLACK 

CURRANT 

Ribes americanum MILL. 

Plant Symbol = RIAM2  

Contributed by: USDA NRCS Bismarck Plant Materials 
Center   

 
American black currant. Photo courtesy of USDA NRCS, Bismarck, 
North Dakota  
 
Alternate Names  
Wild black currant, black currant 
 
Uses  
Windbreaks: This species is suitable for the outside rows 
of multi-row belts. 
 
Wildlife: Black currant is a favored browse of grazing 
animals.  Birds and small mammals eat the berries.  This 
species may form thickets which are desirable for habitat.   
 
Recreation and Beautification: This low-growing shrub 
has attractive flowers which are visited by insect 
pollinators.  The berries are nearly black in color, with a 
smooth, glossy surface.  They are high in vitamins and 
antioxidants and are used for human consumption.  The 
crimson/gold fall leaf color adds to its visual appeal.   
 
Status  
In Minnesota and Michigan, American black currant is 
reported to invade sedge meadows (Marshall, 1995).  
White pine blister rust legislation prohibits the planting of 
Ribes spp. in Michigan.  Please consult the PLANTS Web 
site and your State Department of Natural Resources for 
this plant’s current status (e.g., threatened or endangered 
species, state noxious status, and wetland indicator 
values).  

 

Adaptation  
American black currant is suitable for many conservation 
and agroforestry plantings on a variety of soil types.  It is 
considered highly drought tolerant and is shade tolerant.  
It grows best in USDA Plant Hardiness Zones 3-5.   
  
Establishment  
Nursery grown seedlings establish readily if planted free 
of competing vegetation, in locations having 14 inches or 
more of annual precipitation.  Bareroot seedlings should 
be planted in the spring, once the threat of frost is over.  
Containerized stock may be planted from spring to the 
middle of summer, if there is adequate moisture.  
Fertilization is not needed.  The optimum spacing is 5 to 6 
feet between plants, as mature plants tend to be wider 
than they are tall.  
  
Management  
Control of invading weeds and grasses is important.  
Shallow cultivation works best.  This currant does not 
spread by suckering.  Plants begin fruiting after three 
years.  
  
Pests and Potential Problems  
Insects and disease are not a serious problem.  Good air 
circulation will help in the prevention of leaf spot and 
other fungal diseases.    
  
Environmental Concerns  
American black currant is considered a low risk for 
serving as a host for the white pine blister rust.  It is not 
tolerant of fire.  
  
Seeds and Plant Production  
There are approximately 313,000 seeds per pound of 
American black currant.  Eighteen pounds of fruit will 
yield a pound of seed.  Currant seeds naturally germinate 
in spring following dispersal.  In the nursery trade, seed is 
sown in the fall, with seedlings being grown for one 
season.    
  
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
These plant materials are available from commercial 
sources.  Riverview germplasm originates from South 
Dakota and is released by the USDA NRCS Plant 
Materials Center, Bismarck, ND (Bismarck Plant 
Materials Center, 2010).   
  
References  
Bismarck Plant Materials Center 2010. Notice of Release: 
  Riverview American Black Currant (Ribes 
 
  Bismarck, North Dakota. April 2010. 7p.  

americanum).  USDA, NRCS Plant Materials Center, 

 

 
 
 
 

 

[Online] Available at 

(accessed 26 February 2010).  

Information System, [Online] U.S. Department of 

First flowering dates and flowering periods of prairie 
plants at Woodworth, North Dakota.  The Prairie 

Callow, J.M., H.A. Kantrud, and K.F. Higgins.  1992.  
 
 
  Naturalist.  24:57-64.  
Hilty, J. Flower-visiting insects of wild black currant.  
 
  www.flowervisitors.info/plants/wb_currant.h
tm  
Larson, G.E., and J.R. Johnson. 1999. Plants of the Black 
  Hills and Bear Lodge Mountains. South Dakota State 
  Univ., Brookings, SD.  
Marshall, K.A. 1995. Ribes americanum. In: Fire Effects 
 
  Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain 
  Research Station, Fire Sciences Laboratory 
 
 
 
Stephens, H.A. 1973.  Woody plants of the North Central 
 
  
Prepared By  
Michael Knudson, Forester, USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Bismarck, North Dakota  
  
Citation  
Knudson, M. 2010. Plant guide for American black 
currant (Ribes americanum). USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Plant Materials Center, Bismarck, 
ND  

(Producer).  Available: 
http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/ (accessed 26 
January 2010).  

Plains. The Univ. Press of Kansas, Lawrence, KS.  

Published April, 2010 

Edited:  29Mar2010mjk  

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

