 
 

 

 

Plant Guide

inches tall with generally one to few yellow-green stems 
per plant. Each stem bears four to seven (up to 12) pairs 
of 2- 3 inch long, lance-shaped leaves (Hitchcock et al., 
1964). It has swollen nodes where the leaves attach to the 
stem. The plant is covered in dense sticky hairs that 
frequently trap dust and insects, hence the common name 
catchfly. Flowers have a tubular calyx approximately 0.6 
inches long; the pale white petals extend slightly beyond 
the sepals. Flowers bloom from mid-July through August 
and sometimes into September. It may remain dormant 
for 3- 6 consecutive years without emerging. The plant 
has a very large taproot (3 ft or longer).  
  
Distribution:  
Spalding’s catchfly is native to portions of Idaho, 
Montana, Oregon, Washington, and British Columbia, 
Canada. It occupies five physiographic regions: the 
Palouse Grasslands in west-central Idaho and southeastern 
Washington; the Channeled Scablands in eastern 
Washington; the Blue Mountain Basins in northeastern 
Oregon; the Canyon Grasslands of the Snake River and its 
tributaries in Idaho, Oregon, and Washington; and the 
intermountain valleys of northwestern Montana. There are 
currently 99 known populations of Spalding’s catchfly, 66 
populations are composed of fewer than 100 individuals 
each. Twenty-three populations contain 100 or more 
individuals apiece, and the 10 largest populations are each 
made up of more than 500 plants (USDI Fish and Wildlife 
Service, 2007). For current distribution, consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
  
Habitat:   
The species occurs in dry to moist grasslands in 
bunchgrass and sagebrush-steppe habitats with Idaho 
fescue and bluebunch wheatgrass being the dominant 
components. Occasionally plants can be found in open 
pine habitats. (USDI Fish and Wildlife Service, 2007).   
  
Adaptation  
Plants can be found from 1900 to 3600 ft in elevation. 
Spalding’s catchfly grows on all aspects but is most often 
encountered on north facing slopes. 
 
The plants prefer sites with deep silt-loam soils 
(Natureserve, 2010).  
  
Establishment  
Spalding’s catchfly reproduces solely by seed. It does not 
spread by rhizomes or other asexual means. It is partially 
self-compatible (Lesica & Heidel 1996), but its offspring 
are more fit if cross-pollinated (Lesica 1993). Bumblebees 
appear to be the primary pollinator (Lesica and Heidel, 
1996).   

SPALDING’S 
CATCHFLY 

Silene spaldingii S. Watson 

Plant Symbol = SISP2 

 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Idaho Plant Materials 
Program  

Figure 1. Spalding’s catchfly.  Photo by C. Menke. 

 
Alternate Names  
Spalding’s campion, Spalding’s silene  
  
Status  
Spalding’s catchfly was listed as threatened by the US 
Department of the Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service in 
2001. It is listed in Idaho as threatened (State of Idaho, 
2009) and endangered in Oregon (Oregon Department of 
Agriculture, 2009). In Washington state it is considered 
threatened with a status of S2 (Washington State, 2010), 
and in Montana it has a rank of S1 (Montana Natural 
Heritage Program, 2010). Natureserve ranks it G2, 
Globally imperiled, with a US national status of N2, and 
Canada national status N1 (Natureserve, 2010). It is listed 
as endangered in Canada (Government of Canada, 2010).  
  
Description  
General: Carnation or pink family (Caryophyllaceae). 
Spalding’s catchfly is a long-lived perennial forb that 
emerges in spring from a woody root crown and dies back 
to below ground level each fall. Plants range from 8 to 30 

 

Seedlings germinate in the spring, form rosettes the first 
year, and occasionally flower the second year. Generally 
flowering does not occur until the third or subsequent 
growing seasons. Adult plants emerge from the caudex in 
spring as either a stemmed plant, a rosette, or occasionally 
as a plant with both rosette(s) and stem(s). Stemmed 
plants may remain vegetative or may become 
reproductive in July or August. Plants senesce or wither in 
fall (September or October), reappearing the next spring 
(USDI Fish and Wildlife Service, 2007).  
  
Laboratory studies have shown that seed germination 
increases following a four to eight week cold stratification 
period (Lesica, 1993).  
  
Spalding’s catchfly arises from a very large tap root 
which may be up to 3 feet deep. This greatly reduces the 
potential for transplanting.   
  
Pests and Potential Problems  
Threats to Spalding’s catchfly primarily involve loss of 
habitat.  This includes habitat loss due to human 
development, habitat degradation associated with 
domestic livestock and wildlife grazing, changes in fire 
frequency and seasonality, and invasions of aggressive 
non-native plants. Plants are also susceptible to herbicide 
spray drift and off-road vehicle use. The species may also 
suffer loss of genetic fitness from population 
fragmentation (USDA Forest Service, 2009).  
 
Management  
Recovery strategies for Spalding’s catchfly involve 
reducing identified threats to catchfly habitat. Measures 
include limiting adverse grazing and off-road vehicle use, 
protecting pollinators, incorporating integrated pest 
management strategies, and appropriate fire management 
(USDI Fish and Wildlife Service, 2010).   
  
References  
Government of Canada. 2010.  Wildlife species 
 
 
 
 
Lesica, P. 1993. Loss of fitness resulting from pollinator 
 
  Madroño 40:193-201.  
 
 
 
 
Hitchcock, C. L., A. Cronquist, M. Ownbey and J. W. 
 
 
 
 
Montana Natural Heritage Program. 2009. Plant species 
 

Thompson. 1964. Vascular plants of the Pacific 
Northwest, Part 2. Salicaceae to saxifragaceae. 
University of Washington Press, Seattle and London. 
597 pp.  

Lesica, P., and B. Heidel. 1996. Pollination biology 
of Silene spaldingii. Unpublished report to Montana 
Field Office of The Nature Conservancy. Montana 
Natural Heritage Program, Helena, Montana. 16 p.  

assessment. [Online]. Available at 
http://www.cosewic.gc.ca/eng/sct5/index_e.cfm  
(accessed 8 Jan 2010). Committee on the status of 
endangered wildlife in Canada. Ottawa, Ontario.  

exclusion in Silene spaldingii (Caryophyllaceae). 

of concern. [Online]. Available at 

 

 

species in Idaho. [Online]. Available at  
www.species.idaho.gov (accessed 30 Dec 2009) 
Idaho Governor’s office of conservation. Boise, ID.  

encyclopedia of life [web application]. Version 7.1. 
NatureServe, Arlington, Virginia. Available 
http://www.natureserve.org/explorer. (Accessed: 
January 7, 2010).   

Spalding’s catchfly. [Online]. Available at 
http://www.fs.fed.us/wildflowers/rareplants/profiles/t
ep/silene_spaldingii/index.shtml (accessed on 7 Jan 
2009). USDA Forest Service. Rangeland 

 
 
NatureServe. 2010. NatureServe Explorer: An online 
 
 
 
 
Oregon Department of Agriculture. 2009. Oregon listed 
plants. [Online]. Available at 
 
http://oregon.gov/ODA/PLANT/CONSERVATION/s
 
tatelist.shtml (accessed 30 Dec 2009). Portland, OR.  
 
State of Idaho. 2009. Federal threatened and endangered 
 
 
 
USDA Forest Service. 2009. Rare plant profile for 
 
 
 
 
  Management Botany Program. Washington DC  
USDI Fish and Wildlife Service. 2001. Endangered and 
threatened wildlife and plants: final rule to list silene 
 
 
spaldingii (Spalding’s catchfly) as threatened. 
 
Federal Register. 66 (196) 51598-51606.  
USDI Fish and Wildlife Service. 2007. Recovery Plan for 
Silene spaldingii (Spalding’s Catchfly). U.S. Fish and 
 
  Wildlife Service, Portland, Oregon. Xiii + 187 pages.  
Washington State. 2010. List of Plants Tracked by the 
  Washington Natural Heritage Program. [Online]. 
 
 
 
 
 
Prepared By  
Derek Tilley; Range Scientist, USDA NRCS Plant 
Materials Center, Aberdeen, Idaho.  
  
Dan Ogle; Plant Materials Specialist, USDA NRCS, 
Boise, Idaho.  
  
Loren St. John; Team Leader, USDA NRCS Plant 
Materials Center, Aberdeen, Idaho.  
  
Citation  
Tilley, D., D. Ogle, and L. St. John. 2009. Plant  guide for 
Spalding’s catchfly (Silene spaldingii). USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Idaho Plant Materials 
Center. Aberdeen, ID. 83210.  
 
Published February, 2010 
 
Edited: 8Jan2010djt; 08Jan10 lsj; 08Jan10 dgo  
 
 

Available at 
http://www1.dnr.wa.gov/nhp/refdesk/lists/plantr 
nk.html (accessed 8 Jan 2010). Washington State 
Department of Natural Resources. Seattle, WA 

http://mtnhp.org/SpeciesOfConcern/?AorPp 
(accessed 22 Dec 2009). Helena, MT.  

 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

