 

Plant Guide

Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation 
if not properly managed.  It does not sucker extensively 
and its fruit is not desired by birds so the degree of spread 
is generally not a problem.  Please consult with your local 
NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service 
Office, state natural resource, or state agriculture 
department regarding its status and use.  Weed 
information is also available from the PLANTS Web site 
at http://plants.usda.gov/.  Please consult the Related Web 
Sites on the Plant Profile for this species for further 
information. 

Description 
Late lilac is native to northern China and is a medium to 
large, hardy shrub with stout spreading branches.  It has 
an oval to irregularly shaped crown.  Flowers are white, 
or rose to pale lavender.  It generally flowers 1- 2 weeks 
“later” than common lilac, and the color fades quickly 
(Eisel, 1997).  Spreading branches sprout from the base.  
Plants of this species were 10 feet tall and 12 feet wide 
after 14 years on loam soils in Conservation Tree and 
Shrub Group 3 in central South Dakota (Knudson, 2004).  
This species will coppice back after a light fire or 
mowing.  It is long-lived. 
 
The brown buds are opposite. Buds are ⅛ to ½ inch long.  
The entire leaves are simple and broad-elliptic to oblong.  
The surface is usually pubescent near the midrib and 
wrinkled.  Margins are entire.  The large and deep-veined 
green leaves are 3 to 7 inches long and 1½ inches to 4 
inches wide.  The flowers which are not as fragrant as 
common lilac, are borne in large terminal panicles.  White 
to lavender flowers form woody capsules with smooth, 
brown seeds (Herman et al., 1996).  There are 41,000 
seeds per pound (Knudson, 2000). 
 
The growth habit is upright with a rounded to oval profile.  
It has a coarse summer and winter texture.  The young 
bark is green-brown, and older bark is gray-brown.  Late 
lilac has a dense, fibrous and shallow root system.  It does 
not form suckers (Herman et al., 1996). 
 
The coarse leaves and short-lived flowers are undesirable 
for landscaping.  This is not a good landscape plant 
because it lacks other good ornamental characteristics 
(Knowles, 1995). 

Distribution 
For current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 

LATE LILAC 
Syringa villosa Vahl 

Plant Symbol = SYVI3 

Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Bismarck, North Dakota  

 

Photo Credit: Lincoln-Oakes Nursery, Bismarck, North Dakota 

Alternate Names 
Common Alternate Names: Villous lilac  
Scientific Alternate Names: None 

Uses 
Conservation: Late lilac is recommended for windbreak 
plantings in fields and farmsteads.  The dense growth 
habit is well suited for providing wind and snow 
protection. 
 
Wildlife and Recreation: It provides escape cover and 
habitat for songbirds and various small mammals.  Lilac 
species are rated excellent for pollen availability when 
bees first emerge in the spring (Henderson, 1987).  The 
attractive whitish, lavender, or rose-colored blooms add 
beauty to recreational plantings. 
 
Ethnobotany: Medicinal use included a tonic made from 
leaves and fruit used for the treatment of sore throats.  
Extracts from Syringa species are known to be toxic to 
various insect pests (Herman et al., 1996). 

Status 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State Department 
of Natural Resources for this plants current status (e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values). 

 

Adaptation 
Late lilac is hardy to Zone 2.  This plant grows best on 
loams, silt loams, and silty clay loams in the 14–30 inch 
precipitation zone.  It is not as drought tolerant as 
common lilac in North Dakota.  It is recommended in the 
NRCS Conservation Tree and Shrub Groups 2-4.  It is not 
recommended for droughty or saline soils (Knudson, 
2000).  Plants growing in heavy sod will have fewer and 
poorer quality blossoms (Ball et al., 2000). 

Management 
Conservation grade seedlings are usually 2 years old and 
1 to 3 feet tall.  Late lilac is a tall shrub that should be 
planted in the spring 3 to 5 feet apart.  Seedlings grow 
medium fast.  Weed control improves survival and growth 
rates.  Dry conditions will cause die-back.  Pruning 
should be done after flowering.  Cutting off decadent top 
growth (coppice) can rejuvenate old or damaged 
plantings. 

Pests and Potential Problems 
Unlike most lilacs, late lilac is more resistant to powdery 
mildew (Blumeria graminis) in years of higher rainfall 
and in areas of higher precipitation.  It may be attacked by 
the lilac borer (Podosesia syvingae) which is a wasplike 
moth.  Larvae tunnel into main stems and cause loss of 
vigor and death.  Heavily infested stems should be pruned 
out.  Other potential disease pests include several types of 
leaf spots and blights; other insect pests include 
caterpillars, scales and leaf miners (Herman et al., 1996; 
Ball et al., 2000). 

Environmental Concerns 
Late lilac is a plant introduced to the United States from 
northern China.  Seed ripens in a capsule not desired by 
birds.  It has basal sprouts, but does not spread by suckers. 
It is not known to spread aggressively.  It may spread by 
seed locally, but is generally not a problem. 
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Seed ripens in a capsule by late summer and is ready to 
harvest in mid to late September.  It should be air-dried 
for several weeks.  Seed can be cleaned using a hammer 
mill and fanning mill.  It requires a cold, moist 
stratification of 45-60 days for spring planting.  Late lilac 
can be fall planted without stratification. Plants reach 
harvestable height after two growing seasons (Knudson, 
2000). 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
‘Legacy’ a seed propagated cultivar released by the 
USDA NRCS Plant Materials Program from Bismarck, 
North Dakota.  It is recommended for field windbreaks, 

 

farmstead windbreaks, wildlife habitat plantings, and 
recreational plantings in the Great Plains.  It does not 
differ significantly from the description for the species. 

References  
Ball J., D. Graper, C. Wake. 2000. Shrubs for South 

Dakota. South Dakota State University: South Dakota 
Cooperative Extension Service EC 904. 

Eisel, M. 1997. Trees, shrubs, and vines for Minnesota 

landscapes. University of Minnesota Extension WW-
00545, St. Paul, Minnesota. 

Henderson, C. 1987. Landscaping for wildlife.  Minnesota 
Dept. of Natural Resources.  Minnesota’s Bookstore, 
St. Paul, Minnesota. 

Herman, D.E., C. Stange, V. Quam. 1996. North Dakota 

tree handbook. USDA NRCS; ND State Soil 
Conservation Committee; NDSU Extension and 
Western Area Power Admin., Bismarck, North 
Dakota. 

Knowles H., 1996. Woody ornamentals for the prairies. 

University of Alberta, Faculty of Extension, 
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. 

Knudson M., 2000. Legacy late lilac release brochure.  

USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, Bismarck, 
North Dakota. 

Knudson, M. 2004. Twenty-five years of tree planting 
trials at the Highmore field evaluation planting.  
Tech. Rep., USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Bismarck, North Dakota. 

Prepared By:  
Dwight A. Tober (retired) 
USDA NRCS, Plant Materials Center,  
Bismarck, North Dakota 

Citation 
Tober, D. 2013. Plant guide for late lilac (Syringa 
villosa). USDA-Natural Resources Conservation Service, 
Plant Materials Center, Bismarck, ND. 
 
Published June 2013 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

 

