  

                          Plant Guide  

 

STRAND 

TANGANTANGAN 
Schleinitzia fosbergii Nevi & 

Niezgoda 

Plant Symbol = SCFO2 

 
Contributed by: CSIRO Forestry & Forest Products 
and USDA NRCS Pacific Basin Office 

taro production systems, especially where organic 
matter has been lost due to drought. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General: Pea Family (Fabaceae). Schleinitzia 
fosbergii is a nitrogen-fixing large shrub with a 
restricted distribution in strandline habitats in the 
Western Pacific.  Schleinitzia is a genus of three 
species in the family Fabaceae, subfamily 
Mimosoideae, and tribe Mimoseae or Adenanthereae.  
The three species are found in the Pacific basin 
(including New Guinea, Melanesia, Micronesia and 
Polynesia).  They resemble and have sometimes been 
placed in the widespread genera Leucaena, 
Piptadenia and Prosopis, but differ in their pollen 
grains, which are arranged in tetrahedral tetrads 
(Nevling and Niezgoda 1978). The genus Schleinitzia 
was originally established by Warburg (1891), and 
has been recently re-established by Verdcourt (1977). 
The specific epithet honors the Pacific botanist, Dr 
F.R. Fosberg.  Botanical descriptions have been 
provided in Nevling and Niezgoda (1978) and Stone 
(1970) (as Leucaena insularum var. guamensis), and 
the following information is principally derived from 
these sources. 
 
It is typically a spreading, brittle, large shrub up to 2 
m tall, and only very rarely attaining the status of a 
small bushy tree to 4-6 m tall. The branches are 
glabrescent or glabrous.  
It has bipinnate leaves, typically with 4-6 pairs of 
pinnae, each with 20-25 pairs of glabrous leaflets, 
each leaflet 5-10 mm long x 2-3 mm wide.  The leaf 
rachis bears 1 (-2) cup-shaped glands between the 
pinnae of the lower-most pair and between all or the 
upper 2-3 pairs of pinnae.  Stipules are erect, 
recurved or reflexed and 1-2.5 mm long. 
The inflorescences are globular, white, and consist of 
numerous tiny flowers. Individual flowers may be bi-
sexual or male (staminate). Each flower has about 
five petals and ten filaments, and is subtended by a 
short peltate bract, 2-2.5 mm long.  
One to five fruits are set per flower-head and these 
are borne on a stout peduncle. Fruits are dark brown 
to black, hard/tough, indehiscent pods, with a 
narrowly winged edge, and covered with a 

 
John Lawrence 
USDA NRCS Pacific Basin Office

 
Alternate Names 
Strand leucaena; Leucaena insularum (Guill.) 
Daniker var. guamensis Fosberg & Stone is a 
synonym for S. fosbergii. Schleinitzia plants differ 
from Leucaena in their indehiscent (non-splitting) 
pods, anthers with glands and albuminous seeds  (cf. 
little albumen in Leucaena) (Nevling and Niezgoda 
1978). 
 
Uses 
The wood is reportedly used as fuel on Guam 
(Limtiaco and Guzman 1999), but other larger and 
more woody species from the same habitat would 
generally be used in preference to this species. 
The leaves are reportedly used as fodder on Guam 
(Limtiaco and Guzman 1999), but possibly this 
record arises due to confusion with Leucaena 
leucocephala. Its suitability as a fodder needs to be 
clarified. 
The species has some environmental importance in 
the protection of fragile seaside ecosystems, 
including nitrogen inputs to infertile sandy soils. It 
may have some potential application in Pacific atoll 
environments for addition of nitrogen and carbon to 

 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 

conspicuous network of veins.  Each pod is 7.5-11 
cm long x c. 1.5 cm wide and holds 8 to 12 (-14) 
seeds. 
Flowering and fruiting times are unknown.  There is 
no published information on variation in S. fosbergii. 
However, there is likely to be limited genetic 
variation given its narrow natural distribution.  This 
would be especially the case if the species has 
evolved relatively recently, and is derived from S. 
insularum following long range dispersal by people 
in ancient times as has been suggested by Nevling 
and Niezgoda (1978). 
Distribution: S. fosbergii is restricted to south-eastern 
Guam and adjacent islands, including the Cocos 
Islands, in the southern part of the Marianas chain in 
the northern Pacific.  On Guam, it is an uncommon 
species on the south-central east coast from Yona to 
Ipan Talofofo. 
It is most closely related to the widespread S. 
insularum and probably evolved from this species.  It 
is distinguished from S. insularum by its: 
(cid:131)  Fewer number of pinnae pairs per bi-pinnate leaf 

(4-5 cf. 7-16 pairs), and 

(cid:131)  Glabrous leaflets, which are also fewer in 

number (20-25 cf. 25-35). 

For current distribution, please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site, http://plants.usda.gov. 
Habitat: The species is found in maritime, tropical 
climates.  The annual rainfall is typically 2000-2500 
mm (range 1800-2700mm).  The wettest period is 
from July-October, with more than half of the annual 
rainfall occurring in these four months.  The period 
from January-May is drier and fires are frequent in 
the dry season.  Tropical cyclones or typhoons occur 
in most years.  Temperatures show limited seasonal 
and diurnal variation.  The mean maximum 
temperature for the hottest month is 29-31oC, mean 
minimum temperature for the coolest month is 22-
25oC and mean annual temperature 26-27oC.  The 
entire distribution is frost-free. 
The species is an uncommon component of strand 
vegetation, including cliff shores.  Associated tree 
and shrub species include Argusia argentia, Cocos 
nucifera, Pemphis acidula, Scaevola sericea and 
Sophora tomentosa.  Associated herbaceous species 
include Ipomoea pescaprae, Lepturus repens and 
Paspalum distichum.  The species occupies a narrow 
band just above the high tide boundary, may have 
been displaced from upper strandline niches, 
including near-seashore secondary forests and 
thickets, by the introduced, related species Leucaena 
leucocephala.  
S. fosbergii has a preference for well-drained alkaline 
sands.  The recorded substrates include coastal 
limestone and coral sand (Limtiaco and Guzman 

 

 

1999).  The soils may contain moderately high levels 
of salts, but due to their good aeration, combined 
with periodic flushing of salts, the salinity hazard is 
only moderate.  
 
Adaptation 
This species is well-adapted to harsh coastal sites that 
are subject to strong salt spray.  Accordingly, it may 
have some environmental importance in beach 
stabilization, including nitrogen inputs to infertile 
sandy soils. 
 
Management 
Propagate from seed that has been pre-treated to 
overcome hard-seededness.  Seed germinates readily 
and rapidly, taking about 5-7 days.  The 
recommended pre-treatment is boiling water, pour 
and soak: this involves adding seed to just-boiled 
water, stirring for 60 seconds and leaving stand for 
five minutes.  Manual nicking or clipping, followed 
by soaking in tap water for 12 hours, is an effective 
pre-treatment for smaller quantities of seed. 
 
In nurseries in Guam, seedlings have been damaged 
by insects infestations near to the stem junction with 
the soil.  Due to the difficulties in raising contained 
seedling stock the species is unknown in cultivation.  
It is expected to grow at a moderate rate in strandline 
habitats similar to those in which it naturally occurs. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
The greatest threat to this species in Guam is the 
invasion and replacement by non-native species, 
including Leucaena leucocephala, in those portions 
of the strand habitat outside of the influence of salt 
spray and wave action during severe weather events.  
Stands may also be destroyed by typhoons. 
 
Cultivars, Improved and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office 
for more information.  Look in the phone book under 
”United States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the 
subheading “Department of Agriculture.” 
 
References 
Limtiaco D. & L.C. Guzman. 1999.  State of Forest 
and Tree Genetic Resources in the Pacific Islands, 
and Sub-Regional Action Plan for their Conservation 
and Sustainable Use.  Guam Country Report to the 
Pacific Sub-Regional Workshop on Forest and Tree 
Genetic Resources 12-16 April, 1999. Forestry & 
Soil Resources Division, Department of Agriculture, 
Government of Guam.  

Nevling LI, Niezgoda, Ch.J, 1978. On the genus 
Schleinitzia (Leguminosae-Mimosoideae). Adansonia 
18 (3): 345-363. 
Stone, B. 1970. The Flora of Guam, Micronesica, 
Vol. 6. University of Guam. 
Verdcourt B, 1977. New taxa of Leguminosae from 
New Guinea. Kew Bulletin 32: 225-251. 
USDA NRCS 2004. The PLANTS database 
<plants.usda.gov>.  National Plant Data Center, 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana.  Accessed 13apr04. 
Warburg O, 1891. Beiträge zur Kenntnis der 
Papuanischen Flora. Bot. Jahrb. 13: 230-455. 
 
Prepared By:  
Lex Thomson, CSIRO Forestry & Forest Products 
Canberra, ACT, Australia  
 
John Lawrence, USDA NRCS Pacific Basin Office 
Mongmong, Guam 
 
Species Coordinator:  
John Lawrence, USDA NRCS Pacific Basin Office 
Mongmong, Guam 
 
Edited: 28apr03; 13oct04 jsp, 21oct04 rln; 060817 jsp 
 
For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or Conservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

 

The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national origin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 

To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 

Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation 
Service.  
 

 

 

