 
 

 

Plant Guide

Description  
Ute Ladies’-Tresses is a perennial, terrestrial orchid with 
mainly 1 stem 12-50 cm tall, arising from tuberously 
thickened roots.  Its linear-lanceolate (1cm wide) leaves 
can reach 28 cm long and persist during flowering.  Basal 
leaves are the longest and become reduced in size up the 
stem. The inflorescence consists of few to many white or 
ivory flowers clustered in a spike of 3-ranked spirals at 
the top of the stem.  The sepals and petals are oriented 
perpendicular to the stem, the lateral sepals often 
spreading abruptly from the base of the flower and all 
sepals are free to the base.  The lip petal is somewhat 
constricted at the median.  Flowering occurs in early 
August and may persist into early September barring frost 
or drought.  Flowers are faintly fragrant with the scent of 
coumarin. The seed is ellipsoidal and dust-like, very well 
adapted to being carried by the wind.  
  
Adaptation and Distribution  
Ute Ladies’-Tresses occurs along riparian edges, gravel 
bars, old oxbows, high flow channels, and moist to wet 
meadows along perennial streams.  It typically occurs in 
stable wetland and seep areas associated with old 
landscape features within historical floodplains of major 
rivers.  It also is found in wetland and seep areas near 
freshwater lakes and springs 
 

 

Teresa Prendusi, USDA Forest Service 
 
Populations of Ute Ladies’-Tresses are known from three 
broad general areas of the interior western United States.  
Near the base of the eastern slope of the Rocky Mountains 
in southeastern Wyoming and adjacent Nebraska and 
north central and central Colorado; in the upper Colorado 
River Basin, particularly the Uinta Basin; and in the 
Bonneville Basin along the Wasatch Front and westward 
in the eastern Great Basin, in north-central and western 
Utah, extreme eastern Nevada and southeastern Idaho.  It 
has also been discovered in southwestern Montana and in 
the Okanogan area and along the Columbia River in 

UTE LADYS’ TRESSES 
Spiranthes diluvialis Sheviak  

Plant Symbol = SPDI6 

Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Idaho Plant Materials 
Program 

Teresa Prendusi, USDA Forest Service  

Uses  
Ute Ladies’-Tresses is a showy, perennial flowering 
orchid that has not been successfully propagated.  It was 
first described by C.J. Sheviak in 1984.  Ute Ladies’-
Tresses are found in open wetland and riparian areas and 
is pollinated mostly by bumblebees (Bombus spp.).  This 
species has scientific significance in studies addressing its 
evolutionary isolation, which has been an important 
subject in conservation biology research.  It has no known 
agricultural, economic, or other human uses at this time.  
  
Status  
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State Department 
of Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g. 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).  In 1992, it was designated 
as Threatened in its Entire Range by the U.S. Fish and 
Wildlife Service.  

  

 

north-central Washington.  Many populations have less 
than 100 individuals, though a couple of populations have 
over 500 plants. 
 
Ute Ladies’-Tresses are restricted to a small, sporadic 
microhabitat represented by calcareous, wet-mesic, 
temporarily-inundated meadow in shallow wetlands.  The 
shallow meandered wetlands are in alluvial fans that 
correspond with two uncommon soils series.  They are 
part of broad, flat, arid, open, low-elevation valley 
bottoms.  The meandered wetlands include narrow 
channels and broader swales, both of which parallel the 
existing river courses, and most are set back over a mile 
from the river and without surface-water connections to 
the river.  The microhabitat is temporarily inundated in 
the spring, often located right below the outer wetland 
margin.  Subsurface hydrological conditions are 
ameliorated by high organic content at the surface, and 
course alluvial cobble directly below.  Water chemistry as 
inferred from soils data is moderately alkaline and high in 
calcium carbonate.  Soils are loamy calcareous wetland 
soils with gley features, generally high in micronutrients 
and organic matter, but are low in phosphorus compared 
to average values for agricultural soils. The range of pH 
values for these types of sites in Colorado and Utah are 
6.6-8.1 and at sites in Nebraska, Wyoming and Montana 
7.6-8.2.  Most locations of Ute Ladies’-Tresses are 
classified as subirrigated ecological sites.  
  
Establishment  
Ute Ladies’-Tresses is a showy flowering orchid that has 
not been successfully propagated.  Efforts are underway 
by the Denver Botanic Gardens and the Red Buttes 
Gardens of Salt Lake City to determine if Ute Ladies’-
Tresses can be propagated.  The plant can produce as 
many as 7,300 tiny seeds per fruit.  Seedlings may persist 
for up to 8 years as subterranean saprophytes dependent 
on mycorrhizal fungi.  Small inconspicuous leaf rosettes 
may emerge at the end of the growing season and 
overwinter.  Individual plants may flower in consecutive 
years or under adverse environmental conditions and may 
persist below ground with their mycorrhizal symbionts.  
Reproduction is sexual in the strictest sense, though each 
year’s plant comes from a separate lateral bud.  Most 
orchids produce new tubers every year by lateral buds.  
There is no evidence that lateral buds produce 
underground shoots, but in collecting voucher specimens, 
it was observed that the multiple, tuberously-thickened 
roots have high turgidity and snap easily.  Although the 
majority of plants are single-stemmed, a small number of 
multi-stemmed plants or small clumps have been noted in 
sites that were trampled by livestock that may indicate 
vegetative reproduction.  
  
Ute Ladies’-Tresses exhibits a mixed-mating system.  The 
degree of selfing depends in part upon the abundance of 
pollinators visiting the flowers.  Outcrossing is promoted 
by male flowers maturing before female flowers and the 
movement of long-tongued bees on inflorescences.  No 

 

 

self-fertile fruit set has been observed, indicating that a 
pollen vector is required for reproduction.  The only 
pollinator visits observed have been late afternoon visits 
by bumblebees (Bombus spp.).  Bees are provided nectar 
rewards but the pollen are in masses that are not available 
to them for food.  The distinctive odor of coumarin from 
the flowers may indicate that there are other rewards to 
the bumblebee such as critical chemicals for producing 
pheromes.  Other suspected pollinators are anthophorid 
bees and hawkmoths.  Seeds are very short-lived and have 
a limited time span for germination after seeds dehisce 
and are generally considered to require endomycorrhizae 
to germinate in the field.  Seeds are very small and require 
a narrow range of moisture and temperature conditions to 
germinate and it is likely they require direct contact with 
mineral soil.  
  
Management  
Modeling of monitored populations in Colorado and Utah 
project population extinction for almost all of the 
populations under most agricultural practices except the 
“grazed only” population and to a lesser extent the “twice 
clipped” population in modeling studies.  Species’ 
longevity and the primary causes of mortality are 
unknown.  At most observation sites, leaves of Ute 
Ladies’-Tresses showed signs of browse by herbivores.  
Even plants represented by immature rosette leaves under 
a continuous canopy cover of grass had browse on one or 
more leaves, though sometimes only the tip of the leaf.  
Some of the browsing may be caused by whitetail deer 
because their numbers were high in the general area of 
observation.  Livestock grazing takes place at many sites 
though it tends to be earlier in the growing season when 
the uplands are still green rather than during flowering 
when only the wetlands and riparian areas are green.  
Clear signs of trampled plants were found at one 
monitoring site where livestock grazing overlapped with 
the flowering period in part of one season.  Vole 
herbivory of inflorescences at a Colorado site was 
identified as a significant threat.  Land managers should 
include pollinators and pollen producing plants in their 
plans to preserve this rare orchid.  The effects of pest 
management programs on bumblebees and the availability 
of suitable bee nesting habitat should be considered. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems  
Besides herbivory, the only other noted observations of 
pests were weevils browsing some inflorescences in 
Montana.  
  
Environmental Concerns  
In 1992, Ute Ladies’-Tresses was designated as 
Threatened in its Entire Range by the U.S. Fish and 
Wildlife Service.  Modeling of monitored populations in 
Colorado and Utah project population extinction for 
almost all of the populations under most agricultural 
practices.  The effects of pest management programs on 
bumblebees and the availability of suitable bee nesting 
habitat should be considered.  

September 28, 2000. 
http://www.chelanpud.org//rr_relicense/study/reports/
2503_1.pdf  

diluvialis Sheviak in Montana. Unpublished report to 
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Montana Natural 
Heritage Program, Helena. 55 pp. + app. [2009 
August 31] 

Biology of the Rare Orchid, Spiranthes diluvialis: 
Breeding System, Pollination, and Implications for 
Conservation. Conservation Biology Volume 9 Issue 
4, p. 929-938.  
http://www3.interscience.Wiley.com/journal/119250
648/abstract?CRETRY=1&SRETRY=0  
[2009 August 31]  

References  
Fact Sheet on Spiranthes diluvialis (Ute Ladies’-Tresses) 
 
 
 
Heidel, B.L. 1998. Conservation status of Spiranthes 
 
 
 
 
Sipes, S.D. and V.J. Tepedino. 2002. Reproductive 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ute Ladies’-Tresses – Montana Field Guide. 
 
 
Ute Ladies’-Tresses Orchid. U.S. Fish and Wildlife 
Service, Mountain Prairie Region Endangered 
 
 
Species Program. http://www.fws.gov/mountain- 
prairie/species/plants/uteladiestresss/index.htm  
 
 
[2009 August 13]  
Wyoming Rare Plant Field Guide. Ute Ladies’-Tresses. 
USGS Northern Prairie Wildlife Research Center.  
 
 
http://www.npwrc.usgs.gov/resource/plants/wyplant/s
pec/spirdilu.htm  
 
 
[2009 August 31]  
  
Prepared By & Species Coordinator:   
Loren St. John, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, ID  
  
Dan Ogle, USDA NRCS Idaho State Office, Boise, ID  

  
http://fieldguide.mt.gov/detail_PMORC2B100.aspx
[2009 August 31]  

Published October, 2009 

Edited: 10Sept09 LWS; 11Sept09GO 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

