                          Plant Guide  

 

  

 

 

 

PRAIRIE 

CORDGRASS 

Spartina pectinata Link 

Plant Symbol = SPPE 

 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS  North Dakota Plant 
Materials Center, Bismarck, North Dakota 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Alternate Names 
Ripgut, cordgrass, marsh grass, slough grass, fresh 
water cordgrass, broadleaf 
 

 
USDA NRCS Bismarck PMC 

Status 
Please consult the PLANTS web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
State noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Description 
General: Prairie cordgrass is a warm-season 
perennial grass. It is native to the tall grass prairies of 
most of the United States and Canada.  It has an 
average height of 3 to 8 feet (Johnson and Larson).  
The leaf blades, 3 to 13 mm wide and up to 30 inches 
long, are coarse, very tough, and thick.  The margins 
of the leaf are serrated and sharp.  Stems are stiff.  It 
is strongly rhizomatous with very tough, scaly 
rhizomes.  Seedheads are composed of 10 to 20 
spikes attached to the main stem.  Each spike has up 
to 40 spikelets, all growing in two rows on the side of 
the spike away from the stem.  The seeds are flat, 
paper-like with barbed awns that attach firmly to fur 
or fabric.  There are approximately 183,000 seeds per 
pound. 
 
Distribution: For current distribution, please consult 
the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS web site. 
 
Habitat:  Prairie cordgrass is found in wet meadows, 
sloughs, potholes, and drainage ways.  It is associated 
with various species including sedges and rushes. 

 

 

Adaptation 
Prairie cordgrass has a broad climatic adaptation.  It 
will grow on seasonally dry sites, tolerates alkaline 
condition and high water tables but is intolerant of 
prolonged flooding.  It will grow on a wide array of 
soil types, but prefers a soil other than sand.   
 
Establishment  
Prairie cordgrass can be established from seed or 
vegetative material.  Following are guidelines for 
each of these propagation methods. 
 
Vegetative Propagation 
 
Vegetative  Material  Quality:  The  strong  rhizomes 
can  be  used  for  propagation.    The  ideal  piece  of 
vegetative  material  is  a  “J”  hook  piece  of  rhizome 
with  buds  and  4  to  12  inches  of  dry  stem.    Other 
rhizome pieces can be used if there are roots and at 
least  one  bud.    The  stem  length  is  not  critical  for 

Uses 
The stiff stems, vigorous rhizomes and robust size of 
this species are useful in stabilizing soil, dissipating 
wave energy and providing cover. 
 
(cid:131) 
(cid:131) 
(cid:131) 
(cid:131) 
(cid:131) 
(cid:131) 
(cid:131) 
(cid:131) 
(cid:131) 
 
Plant Materials <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/> 
Plant Fact Sheet/Guide Coordination Page <http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov/intranet/pfs.html> 
National Plant Data Center <http://npdc.usda.gov> 

wetland restoration and enhancement 
streambank stabilization 
windstrip barrier 
filterstrip 
riparian buffer 
prairie landscaping 
wildlife habitat – nesting and cover 
forage - very early season only 
spillway and dam cover 

growth, but, if attached, makes planting and handling 
easier. 
 
Vegetative Source: 

(cid:131) Local sites such as a ditch or wet meadow 
(cid:131) Nursery propagation bed - Material is usually 
more uniform and plants tend to be larger and 
stronger making them easier to handle and 
improving survival. 

 
Harvest Date:       

(cid:131) Spring (early April-June) 
(cid:131) Fall (dormant-October/November)-Rhizomes 
dug in the fall should be stored in controlled 
conditions of temperatures near freezing.  Do 
not allow pieces to become too warm or dry. 

 

USDA NRCS Bismarck PMC

 
 
Harvest Method: 
Vegetative material 
can be dug by hand 
or with an 
undercutter, disk or 
plow.  Depth of 
digging will vary 
depending on site 
conditions.  In older 
stands, the 
intertwined rhizomes 
are course, stiff, and 
have sharp buds.  
Material most easily 
processed is from younger growth found on the 
outside edge of an old stand or from newer plantings.  
Plants 2 to 3 years old would be the easiest material 
to handle and process.  Once rhizomes are dug, 
pieces should be cut as described above.  It is 
important to keep processed rhizomes cool and moist 
until planting.  Another method of establishment 
would be to scatter the rhizomes, cover, and firm the 
planting bed. 
 
Planting Method: Rhizomes should be planted with 
the shoot upright.  Roots and at least part of the shoot 
should be buried.  The average planting depth should 
be 3 to 6 inches.  Rhizomes have been successfully 
planted using a tree planter and by hand planting.  Air 
space around the planted rhizome should be removed 
by packing. 
 
Spacing: This will vary depending on the purpose of 
the planting and site conditions. 
 

Seed increase fields and nursery beds: 
Recommended spacing between rows is 6 to 

 

15 feet.  Suggested spacing within row is 3 
to 6 feet. 
 
Streambanks, riparian areas, other erosion 
control sites: Spacing can vary, depending 
on slope, stabilization required, mulch, and 
available plants and resources.  Generally, 
plants are spaced 2 to 10 feet apart and 
planted in off-set rows.  Rhizomes planted 
along streambanks should be planted several 
feet beyond the water line.  Cordgrass is 
intolerant of frequent flooding.  Ice jams and 
fluctuating water can wash out plants closer 
to the water line.  Rhizomes planted higher 
up the slope will readily send shoots down 
the slope toward the water line. 

 
Seed Propagation 
Seeding Method:   

(cid:131) 
(cid:131) 

drill 
broadcast 

 

 
Seeding Rate:    
Based on 183,000 seeds/lb, 
the following are general 
seeding rates.  Actual rates 
may vary depending on site 
locations and purpose of 
planting.  These 
recommendations are 
guidelines for 
establishment in the Northern Great Plains. 

(cid:131) 
(cid:131) 

30 seeds/ft2  (7 lbs PLS/acre) 
1/4 to 1 pound PLS/acre in wet meadow 

USDA NRCS Bismarck PMC

 

mixes 
 
Seeding Depth: ½ to ¾ inches 
 
Seed Quality: 

Viability: Viability of seed decreases when 
stored under high temperatures and humidity.  
In controlled storage, germination remains good 
for about 3 years.  Current purity and 
germination tests (9 months or less) are needed 
for accurate seeding rates.  Germination tests 
may be difficult to interpret, however, as there 
are no standardized testing procedures.  You 
may want a second opinion for newer lots with 
low germinations.  Dormancy reported on seed 
tests should be considered in seed viability. 
 
Flowability: Debearded or deawned seed is 
more flowable, and seeding rate and placement 
is more accurate and consistent than for non-
debearded (awned) seed. 

Wide row spacing 

 

 

Seed Source: Most seed of prairie cordgrass is 
produced in the northern regions of North America.  
Insect predation inhibits seed production in more 
southern climates. 
  

Adapted Release or Selection: Red River 
Germplasm is the only known release with seed 
commercially available.  Performance 
consistency in released material is greater than 
for local ecotypes. 
 
Adapted local ecotype: Seed can be purchased 
from native plant nurseries and commercial seed 
growers or can be harvested from local 
populations.  Seed can be hand stripped or 
combined in late fall.  Seed fill is often poor in 
native harvests.  Filled seeds have a kernel or 
embryo.  Cut seeds crosswise to determine fill. 

 
Management 
Seedling vigor is only moderate, and seed often 
germinates throughout the course of the summer.  
Seedlings develop slowly.  Stands are established 
more quickly by planting vegetative material 
compared to seeding.  Adequate water at planting 
time is critical for establishment of seed and 
vegetative material.  Once the stand is established, 
watering is less critical.  Due to the rhizomatous 
growth and size of the plants, weed competition is 
not usually a problem in established stands. The first 
few years of establishment by seed may require weed 
control if heavily infested.  Prairie cordgrass has few 
management needs.  Mowing of prairie cordgrass 
more than once per season can reduce vigor. 
 
Seed production fields:  Seed fields established from 
rhizomes will produce some seed the first year.  Seed 
fields established from seed usually takes 2 to 3 years 
before producing a seed crop.  Seed can be combined 
after the first frost in northern regions and shattering 
is generally not a problem.  Seed yields at the 
Bismarck, North Dakota Plant Materials Center have 
varied from 30 to 75 PLS lbs/acre with wide row 
spacing.  Plantings used for seed production can 
become quite sodbound after 5 years and seed 
production inhibited.  Rhizomes will need to be 
separated by some means, or a new field established. 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Pests do not appear to be a problem for vegetative 
material.  Seed predation by insects is a problem in 
most areas except the extreme northern climates of 
the United States. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Environmental Concerns 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed. Please consult 
with your local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative 
Extension Service office, or State natural resource or 
agriculture department regarding its status and use.  
Weed information is also available from the 
PLANTS web site at plants.usda.gov. 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘Red River Germplasm’ prairie cordgrass is a 
selection named and released by the Bismarck, North 
Dakota Plant Materials Center.  It is a composite of 
plant materials from Grant County, Minnesota; Cass 
and Grand Forks Counties in North Dakota; and Day 
County in South Dakota.  Select Class seed and 
vegetative material is available in the commercial 
market of this selection. 
 
‘Atkins Germplasm’ prairie cordgrass is a selection 
named and released by the Manhattan, Kansas Plant 
Materials Center.  Material for this release originated 
from Washington County, Nebraska.  This is a Select 
Class vegetative release.  There is no seed produced 
or available.  Vegetative material is available for 
increase. 

Weed Control 
Contact your local agricultural extension specialist or 
county weed specialist to learn what works best in 
your area and how to use it safely.  Always read label 
and safety instructions for each control method. 
Trade names and control measures appear in this 
document only to provide specific information.  
USDA, NRCS does not guarantee or warranty the 
products and control methods named, and other 
products may be equally effective. 

References 
Johnson, J R. & G.E. Larson.  1999. Grassland plants 
of South Dakota and the northern Great Plains.  
South Dakota State University College of Agriculture 
and Biological Sciences. B566 (rev.) Brookings, 
South Dakota. 
 
Wynia, Richard.  2003. [personal communication].  
USDA-NRCS, Plant Materials Center, Manhattan, 
Kansas. 

Prepared By:  
Nancy K. Jensen, USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Bismarck, North Dakota. 
 

Edited: 24may06jsp 
 
For more information about this and other plants, please contact 
your local NRCS field office or Conservation District, and visit the 
PLANTS Web site<http://plants.usda.gov> or the Plant Materials 
Program Web site <http://Plant-Materials.nrcs.usda.gov> 

 

The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits 
discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of 
race, color, national origin, sex, religion, age, disability, political 
beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all 
prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities 
who require alternative means for communication of program 
information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA's TARGET Center at 202-720-2600 (voice and TDD). 

To file a complaint of discrimination write USDA, Director, Office 
of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and 
Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 
202-720-5964 (voice or TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity 
provider and employer. 

Read about Civil Rights at the Natural Resources Convervation 
Service.  
 

 

 

