 
 

 

Plant Guide

Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General: Compass plant is a long lived perennial member 
of the sunflower or composite family (Asteraceae). The 
basal leaves and stems all arise from an underground 
crown. A large reddish brown tap root 2.54 to 5.08 
centimeters (cm) is located just below the crown, but 
rapidly looses diameter as it descends into the soil 
(Weaver, 1954). The tap root extends from 3 to 4 meters 
(m) deep into the soil with a few branching roots 
extending out into a column of soil from 2 to 3 m in 
diameter. Basal leaves of younger plants are large (.6 m) 
deeply cut, angularly lobed, clasping, hairy, and are 
oriented vertically instead of horizontally. The leaf blades 
tend to point north and south, thereby avoiding the heat of 
the noonday sun and earning the plant its common name 
(Art, 1991). Stems are erect and number from one to 
several with total height between 1 and 3.5 m. Simple 
leaves have an alternate arrangement on the stem and are 
large and deeply lobed at the stem base and less divided, 
smaller leaves exhibit sessile attachment higher up on the 
stem. Leaves are leathery and stiff with rough surfaces 
and hairs located on the main veins. Large yellow flower 
heads (5 to 10 cm) are borne along the upper half to two 
thirds of the stem in small clusters, on short stalks, from 
the axils of the reduced leaves or the stem apex. Flower 
blooming begins in late June and proceeds through 
August. The flower heads begin to open at the top of the 
stem. There are 15 to 34 narrow yellow “petals” (ray 
florets), 2.5 to 5.0 cm long, and numerous disk florets 
with yellow corollas in the center of the flower (Platt and 
Harder, 1991). The fruits are achenes, flattened, about 1.3 
cm long with notched tips. The achenes only develop on 
the outside of the head since only the ray florets have 
fertile pistils and produce seed units (Platt and Harder, 
1991). 
 
Distribution: For current distribution, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. Compass plant grows in the eastern half of Kansas. It 
is found in the eastern section of the Great Plains from 
North Dakota to Texas and eastward to Ohio and 
Alabama. 
 
Habitat: Compass plant grows in full sun in tallgrass and 
mixed grass prairies and in moderately disturbed areas 
such as roadsides. It is found on a variety of soil types 
from clay loams to silt loams, but thrives where there is 
moist, deep subsoil present. It can tolerate a wide pH 

COMPASS PLANT 
Silphium laciniatum L. 

Plant Symbol = SILA3 

 
Contributed by: USDA / NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Manhattan, KS 

 

Alan Shadow, NRCS, East Texas PMC, Nacogdoches, TX 
 
Alternate Names rosinweed, gum weed, cut-leaf 
silphium, or turpentine plant 
 
Uses 
Livestock: It is reported that compass plant is palatable 
and nutritious and grazed by livestock especially in a 
juvenile state. It will decrease in heavily grazed pastures 
and eventually disappear from the site (Haddock, 2005). 
Eddy (1992) found it along roadsides in the Kansas Flint 
Hills, but rarely found it in pastures. 
Native American uses: The pounded root of compass plant 
was used by the Pawnees to make a tea for “general 
debility”. This tea was also used by the Santee Dakotas to 
rid horses of worms and by the Omahas and Poncas as a 
horse tonic (Kindscher, 1992). The Indian children of 
several tribes used the resinous sap as a chewing gum to 
cleanse their teeth and sweeten their breath.  Preparations 
from compass plant were used by nineteenth century 
doctors as an antipyretic, diuretic, emetic, expectorant, 
tonic, styptic, antispasmodic, and stimulant and for their 
diaphoretic properties (Kindscher, 1992). 
Wildlife: Birds and small mammals eat the seeds (Art, 
1991). In grasslands, devoid of woody species, the 
compass plant provides a sturdy perch for prairie 
songbirds. Eastern kingbirds use the compass plant as a 
perch to locate and capture grassland insects (Platt and 
Harder, 1991). 
 
 
 

 

range. Weaver and Fitzpatrick (1934) found it in 66 
percent of the lowland prairies and 45 percent of the 
upland prairies they studied. 
 
Adaptation 
Found on open prairies and roadsides, especially in areas 
with mild soil disturbance (Kindscher, 1992). Full sun is 
the major requirement of this easily cultivated, hardy 
species (Art, 1991). It is found on a variety of soil types, 
but it needs a moist, deep subsoil to thrive.  
 
Establishment 
The easiest way to propagate compass plant is by planting 
stratified seed in the spring or unstratified seed in the fall. 
Moist stratification (60 days at 40 degrees F) and 
scarification will enhance germination (Art, 1991). To 
scarify the seed, nick the seed coat with a sharp knife 
prior to planting. The first year the seedlings have only a 
single leaf, and it will take 2 to 3 years for the plant to 
mature and produce flowers. Much of the plants energy 
and carbon are invested in extensive root production the 
first years of life. 
Pleasants and Jurik’s (1992) study of plant seedling 
recruitment of compass plant indicated that the plants 
with the larger number of seedheads had a significantly 
higher density of seedlings around them. Estimates of 
seed production of individual compass plants indicated 
that about 1 percent of the seed became seedlings each 
year (Pleasants and Jurik, 1992).   
 
Management 
Seedling plants have only a single leaf their first year of 
growth. Kindscher (1992) indicated that the compass 
plant will flower in two to three years. Platt and Harder 
(1991) stated that in their experience compass plants did 
not bloom until the fourth or fifth growing season. Should 
compass plant be grown as a specimen plant it may need 
to be staked to keep the stalks from blowing over.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
A recent study has revealed that insect natural enemies 
can influence reproductive success of host plants by 
eliminating natural herbivores, thereby reducing damage 
to photosynthetic or reproductive plant tissues (Tooker 
and Hanks, 2006). Price et al. (1980) proposed that 
natural enemies can indirectly influence plant fitness by 
killing herbivorous insects.  
Tooker and Hanks (2006) presented field evidence that 
parasitoids of an endemic community enhance plant 
reproduction by killing larvae of gall wasps and that 
plants produced volatile cues that parasitoids use in 
locating hosts.  
Kindscher (1992) indicated that mature cultivated 
compass plants often become large and top heavy and 
have a tendency to fall over. 
Silphium laciniatum is a new horticultural plant in Poland 
grown for medicinal, ornamental and forage crop 
purposes. A disease was noticed on 15 percent of the 
plants causing stunting, yellowing of leaves, and reduced 

 

 

inflorescence production. Oblong brown-purplish lesions 
developed on the stems during the month of July. 
Alternaria alternata was isolated from the affected stems, 
cultured on artificial media grown in the lab, and finally 
inoculated on compass plant seedlings to recreate the 
disease symptoms (Wagner and Jamiolkowska, 2004). 
 
Environmental Concerns 
Compass plant does not spread vegetatively except as the 
clump of the original plant grows in diameter. The basal 
clump of leaves of a mature plant may grow to 1 to 1.75 
m in diameter and tend to shade out plants within the 
basal leaves. This species volunteers easily from seed 
(Platt and Harder, 1991).  
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Seed Production: Seed can be harvested from nursery 
stock in late August or September. The plants flower from 
about June 27 to August 20th
. After drying, the seed units 
can be run through a hammer mill to break up the seed 
head and release the achenes. Then seed units can be run 
over a two screen Clipper cleaner with a top screen of 25 
and a lower screen of 9 to 13. The seed can then be finally 
cleaned to a purity of 48 percent with approximately 
46,600 seeds per kilogram (k). Other methods of seed 
processing can be utilized to improve final purity of the 
harvested seed.    
 
Bareroot Plant Production: Field collected seed is planted 
in the fall without being subjected to cold storage. Seed 
can be sown in raised propagation bed that preferentially 
consists of sandy loam soil. Total time from planting to 
plant harvest can take from 12 months for fall dug 
propagules to 18 months if plants are harvested in the 
spring.  
  
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office for 
more information.  Look in the phone book under ”United 
States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
Two compass plant germplasm lines, NF-1 (Reg. no. GP-
114, PI 628632) and NF-1 Profuse Ligule (Reg. no. GP-
115, PI 628633) were developed by the Samuel Roberts 
Noble Foundation, Inc., and released January 7, 2002. 
NF-1 is a broad based population intended to provide 
breeders and other researchers with germplasm adapted to 
the southern Great Plains (Hopkins et al., 2002). NF-1 
Profuse Ligule is a half-sib family derived from a single 
plant expressing the profuse ligule trait. Chromosome 
number of NF-1 and NF-1 Profuse Ligule is 2n=2x=15. 
The germplasm lines should be useful in developing 
improved cultivars, novel germplasm, as well as studying 
the biology, genetics, and ecology of compass plant. Seed 
stocks of NF-1 and NF-1 Profuse Ligule will be 

Edition. Storey Communications, Inc. Pownal, VT. 

University Press of Kansas. Lawrence, KS. 

Kauffman Museum, Bethel College. Newton, KS. 

Registration of NF-1, and NF-1 Profuse Ligule, 
Compass Plant Germplasm. Crop Science. 42: 2219-
2220. 

refugia for herbaceous plants in the central Flint Hills 
grazing region of Kansas. In: Smith and Jacobs (eds.) 
Proceedings of the Twelfth North American Prairie 
Conference. University of Northern Iowa. Cedar 
Falls, IA. 

maintained by the Forage Biotechnology Group at The 
Noble Foundation, Ardmore, OK 73401.  
 
References 
Art, H.W. 1991. The Wildflower Gardener’s Guide; 
  Midwest, Great Plains, and Canadian Prairies 
 
Eddy, T.A. 1992. The role of prairie road borders as 
 
 
 
 
 
Haddock, M.J. 2005. Wildflowers and Grasses of Kansas. 
 
University Press of Kansas. Lawrence, KS. 
Hopkins, A.A., L. Yun, and D.W. Walker. 2002. 
 
 
 
Kindscher, K. 1992. Medicinal Wild Plants of the Prairie. 
 
Pleasants, J.M. and T. W. Jurik. 1992. Dispersion of 
seedlings of the prairie compass plant, Silphium 
 
 
laciniatum (Asteraceae). American Journal of 
 
Botany. 79 (2): 133-137. 
Platt, D.R. and L.H. Harder. 1991. Growing Native 
  Wildflowers. Kansas Wildflower Society Handbook. 
 
Price, P.W., C.E. Bouton, P. Gross, B.A. McPheron, J.N. 
Thompson, and A.E. Weiss. 1980. Interactions 
 
among three trophic levels: influence of plants on 
 
interactions between insect herbivores and natural 
 
enemies. Ann. Rev. Ecol. Syst. 11: 41-65. 
 
Tooker, J.F. and L.M. Hanks. 2006. Tritrophic 
 
 
 
Wagner, A. and A. Jamiolkowska. 2004. First Report of 
 
 
 
Weaver, J.E. 1954. North American Prairie. Johnsen 
 
Weaver, J.E. and T.J. Fitzpatrick. 1934. The Prairie. 
 
 
 
Prepared By and Species Coordinator 
Richard Wynia, USDA NRCS Manhattan Plant Materials 
Center, Manhattan, KS 

Interactions and Reproductive Fitness of the Prairie 
Perennial Silphium laciniatum Gillette (Asteraceae). 
Environmental Entomology. 35 (2): 537-545. 

Alternaria alternata Causing Stem Bight of Compass 
Plant (Silphium laciniatum) in Poland. Plant Disease. 
88(9): 1045. 

Publishing Co. Lincoln, NE. 

Ecological Monographs. Volume 4. Duke University 
Press. Durham, NC. 

Citation 
Wynia, R., 2009. Plant Guide for compass plant (Silphium 
laciniatum L.) USDA-Natural Resources Conservation 
Service, Kansas Plant Materials Center, Manhattan, 
Kansas  66502 

Published October, 2009 

Edited: 090529 jsp 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

