 
 

Plant Guide

 

Alternate Names 
Gauge plant, one-stemmed butterweed, single-stemmed 
groundsel, western groundsel, wet-the-bed 
Columbia ragwort=S. integerrimus var. exaltatus 
Pale yellow ragwort=S. integerrimus var. ochroleucus 
Scribner’s ragwort=S. integerrimus var. scribneri 

Uses 
Wildlife: Lambstongue ragwort attracts a variety of 
pollinators including bumblebees, butterflies and flies 
(Schmitt, 1980). 
 
Livestock: CAUTION Lambstongue ragwort and other 
members of the genus have been found to contain toxic 
alkaloids (Tilley and St. John 2011), and presents a risk to 
livestock (Clawson, 1933; Talcott, 2003).  
 
Other: Lambstongue ragwort was used by settlers and 
ranchers to determine range “readiness”. When it was in 
flower, the range was believed to be sufficiently 
developed for grazing to begin, hence the common name 
“gauge plant” (Welsh and others, 2003). In western 
folklore it was blamed for causing bedwetting (Welsh and 
others, 2003). 

Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Description 
General:  Lambstongue ragwort is a perennial forb in the 
sunflower family (Asteraceae). It has a short semi-
rhizomatous caudex giving rise to 1 or more upright stems 
growing 10 to 60 cm (4 to 24 in) tall. The basal and lower 
stem leaves are petiolate, 3 to 20 cm (1 to 8 in) long and 1 
to 4 cm (0.4 to 1.6 in) wide. The leaves are lanceolate to 
oblong in outline. The margins are typically entire, but 
sometimes serrate or dentate. The upper stem leaves are 
smaller. The herbage is covered with cobwebby hairs 
when young. The stems and leaves become more glabrous 
as the plant matures. The inflorescence is a compact to 
loose cyme. The flower heads have ray and disk flowers. 
The ray flowers have yellow petals, 4 to 15 mm (0.2 to 
0.6 in) long. The bracts surrounding the floral head have 
black tips. The fruit is an achene with a white pappus 
(Welsh and others, 2003). There are approximately 
400,000 seeds/lb (USDA-NRCS, 2012). 
 
Five varieties of lambstongue ragwort are currently 
recognized. Barkley (1997) provides a taxonomic key to 
varieties. 

LAMBSTONGUE 

RAGWORT 

Senecio integerrimus Nutt. 

Plant Symbol = SEIN2 

Including: 

S. integerrimus Nutt. var. exaltatus (Nutt.) Cronquist. 
(SEINE) 
S. integerrimus Nutt. var.integerrimus (SEINI) 
S. integerrimus Nutt. var. major (A. Gray) Cronquist 
(SEINM) 
S. integerrimus Nutt. var. ochroleucus (A. Gray) 
Cronquist (SEINO) 
S. integerrimus Nutt. var. scribneri (Rydb.) T.M. Barkley 
(SEINS) 

Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho 

 
Lambstongue ragwort. Photo by Paul Slichter. 
 
 

Distribution:   
Lambstongue ragwort occurs throughout western North 
America from British Columbia east to Manitoba and 
south to New Mexico and California.  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS Web site. 

Habitat:  Lambstongue ragwort occurs in low lying desert 
shrub communities to alpine plant communities from 
5,000 to 11,000 ft. It is commonly found in grassy 
meadows, sagebrush, mountain brush, ponderosa pine, 
aspen and fir communities. 

Adaptation 
This species is adapted to fine to coarse textured soils 
with a pH of 6.5 to 8.5 (USDA-NRCS, 2012). It is most 
commonly found in habitats receiving 30 to 64 cm (12 to 
25 in) of annual precipitation. 

Establishment 
The full stand seeding rate, based on 50 pure live seeds 
Pure Live Seed (PLS) per foot at 12 inch spacing, is 5 lbs 
PLS/acre. When planted in a mixture, the seeding rate 
should be adjusted according to the proportion of the mix. 
 
Management 
Management strategies should be based on the key 
species in the established plant community.  Grazing 
should be deferred on seeded lands for at least two 
growing seasons to allow for full stand establishment.  
 
Blaisdell and Mueggler (1956) reported light mortality of 
lambstongue ragwort from spraying 2,4-D in sagebrush 
rangelands. 

Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no known pests associated with this species. 
Lambstongue ragwort contains compounds toxic to cattle 
and other livestock, but will be avoided when other 
preferable forage is available. 

Environmental Concerns 
Lambstongue ragwort is toxic to cattle and livestock and 
should not be planted in grazed areas.   

Seeds and Plant Production 
Wildland collections can be made by hand stripping or 
shaking ripe seed into collection bags. Seed can be 
collected shortly before maturity by harvesting the entire 
inflorescence and allowing the seed to continue ripening 
while drying.  
 
Mature seed can be removed from the floral heads using a 
laboratory brush machine with a number 7 mantle at a 
speed of 2. The gate is left approximately 1 cm open to 
allow the brushed seed to fall through to the catch pan 
below. The brushes dislodge the seed from the heads and 
remove the pappus. The brushed material is then cleaned 
using a multi-deck air screen cleaner with a 1.55 mm top 

 

 

screen, blank middle, and solid bottom screen. The air is 
set at approximately 1.5 to pick up the removed pappus, 
unfilled achenes and light inert matter. These methods 
yield high purities (90-100%). Seed is stored in cool-dry 
conditions with temperatures of approximately 10° C (50° 
F) and relative humidity of 20 to 30%. 
 
Plant Production: 
Lambstongue ragwort seed exhibits physiological 
dormancy. Extensive cold moist stratification is required 
for germination (Baskin and Baskin, 2002; Skinner 2009). 
Seed is sown into conetainers in late fall and early winter 
and placed outdoors for natural stratification. Germination 
begins in March and may span two to four weeks. Soil 
moisture should be maintained. Water soluble fertilizer is 
applied once per week. In Washington, the plants are 
stored in a lath house during winter and are protected 
from extreme cold temperatures with mulch. The plants 
are then transplanted the following spring. Flowering and 
seed production occurs 1 to 2 years after outplanting 
(Skinner, 2009).  

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
There are currently no commercial releases of 
lambstongue ragwort. 
 
References 
Barkley, T.M. 1997. Senecio. In: Flora of North America 

Editorial Committee, eds. 1993+. Flora of North 
America North of Mexico. New York and Oxford. 
Vol. 21. 616p. 

Baskin, Carol C.; Baskin, Jerry M. 2002. Propagation 

protocol for production of container Senecio 
integerrimus Nutt. plants; University of Kentucky, 
Lexington, Kentucky. In: Native Plant Network. 
URL: http://www.nativeplantnetwork.org (accessed 5 
January 2012). Moscow (ID): University of Idaho, 
College of Natural Resources, Forest Research 
Nursery. 

Blaisdell, J.P., and W.F. Mueggler. 1956. Effect of 2,4-D 

on forbs and shrubs associated with big sagebrush. 
Journal of Range Mangement. 9(1): 38-40. 

Clawson, A.B. 1933. The American groundsels species of 

Senecio as stock poisoning plants. Veterinary 
Medicine 28 (3): 105.110. 

Schmitt, J. 1980. Pollinator foraging behavior and gene 

dispersal in Senecio (Compositae). Evolution 34: 
934-943. 

Skinner, David M. 2009. Propagation protocol for 

production of container Senecio integerrimus Nutt. 
exaltatus (Nutt.) Cronq. plants (10 cu. in.); USDA 
NRCS - Pullman Plant Materials Center, Pullman, 
Washington. In: Native Plant Network. URL: 
http://www.nativeplantnetwork.org (accessed 5 
January 2012). Moscow (ID): University of Idaho, 
College of Natural Resources, Forest Research 
Nursery. 

Talcott, P: 2003. Pyrrolizidine Alkaloid Poisoning. In: 

Robinson NE (ed): Current Therapy in Eqine 
Medicine, 5th Edition. Philidelphia, W.B. Saunders 
Co. pp. 788-790. 

Tilley D, St. John L. 2011. Initial toxicity screening of 

groundsel (Senecio spp.); 2011 Progress Report. 
Aberdeen (ID): USDA Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Aberdeen Plant Materials 
Center. 3 p. 

USDA-NRCS. 2009. The PLANTS Database [Online]. 

Available at http://plants.usda.gov (accessed 10 
January 2012). USDA-NPDC, Baton Rouge, LA. 

Welsh, S.L., Atwood, N.D., Goodrich, S., and L.C. 

Higgins. 2003. A Utah Flora. Third Edition, revised. 
Brigham Young University, Provo, UT. 

 
Prepared By:   
Derek Tilley, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, ID 
 
Loren St. John, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, ID 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Citation 
TIlley, D., and L. St. John. 2012. Plant Guide for 
lambstongue ragwort (Senecio integerrimus). USDA-
Natural Resources Conservation Service, Aberdeen Plant 
Materials Center. Aberdeen, Idaho 83210. 

Published  
Edited: 10Jan2012djt; 11Jan2012  ls; 13Jan2012 jab 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

