 
 

 

Plant Guide

aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid) is a synthetic product.  
Salicylic acid got its name from Salix (Randall, 1969). 
 
Aboriginal peoples of North America used various plant 
parts of black willow for uses such as drugs to treat 
aliments, fiber for basketry and other uses. 
 
Drug Uses – “The medicinal part of the plant is the inner 
bark and was used as a pain reliever for a variety of 
ailments (arnatural.org, 2010).”  Antiperiodic:  a medicine 
preventing the recurrence of periodic disturbances and 
irregularities.  Anti-rheumatics: medicines correcting and 
relieving rheumatism.  Antiseptics: agents preventing or 
countering decay, or the formation of pus.  Astringents: 
agents producing contractions of organic tissues, or the 
arrest of a discharge.  (Meridian Institute, 2010).  
Analgesic:  Infusion of roots taken by the Koasati for 
headaches (Taylor, 1940).  Antidiarrheal: An infusion of 
bark used by the Cherokee to check the bowels (Hamel 
and Chiltoskey, 1975); Blood Medicine:  a decoction of 
roots and bark taken by the Houma for “feebleness” due 
to thin blood (Speck, 1941). Carminative:  A compound 
decoction taken for stomach gas by the Iroquois (Herrick, 
1977).  Cough Medicine:  A compound decoction was 
taken by the Iroquois for coughs (Herrick, 1977).  
Dermatological Aid:  The Cherokee used a decoction or 
infusion of bark as a wash to make the hair grow; and the 
bark was also used as a poultice (Hamel and Chiltoskey, 
1975); The Micmac made a poultice of bruised leaves 
used on sprains and bruises; also a poultice of scraped 
root and spirits was applied to bruises and sprains (Speck, 
1917).  Febrifuge:  An infusion taken by the Cherokee for 
fever (Hamel and Chiltoskey, 1975); the Houma made a 
decoction of roots and bark was taken for fever (Speck, 
1941); Cold infusion of roots was taken for fevers by the 
Koasati (Taylor, 1940).  Gastrointestinal Aid:  decoction 
of roots taken by the Koasati for dyspepsia (Taylor, 
1940).  Orthopedic Aid:  the Micmac applied a poultice of 
bruised leaves to use on sprains and bruises; also a 
poultice of scraped root and spirits was applied to sprains 
and broken bones (Speck, 1917).  Respiratory Aid:  the 
root was chewed by Cherokee ball players “for wind” 
(Hamel and Chiltoskey, 1975).  Throat Aid: infusion of 
inner bark taken for lost voice and root chewed for 
hoarseness by the Cherokee (Hamel and Chiltoskey, 
1975) and used by the Iroquois for mouth and throat 
abscesses (Herrick, 1977).  Tonic
:  the bark was also used 
as a tonic by the Cherokee (Hamel and Chiltoskey, 1975). 
 
Basketry and Weaving – The Papago split twigs in half 
lengthwise, sun dried and used as a foundation in coiled 
basketry and used for sewing coiled basketry; also used 
for curved structures in wrapped weaving (Castetter and 
Underhill, 1935).  

BLACK WILLOW 

Salix nigra Marsh. 
Plant Symbol = SANI 

 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Manhattan, Kansas & Kansas State University, Forestry 
Research 

 

 
Photos Courtesy of Philip Barbour, Wildlife Biologist, USDA NRCS, 
Madison, Mississippi 
Alternate Names 
American, Brittle, Champlain, Dudley, Gooding, gulf 
black, puzzle, rough American, scythe-leaf, scythe-
leaved, southwestern black, swamp, tall black, Texas 
black, and western black willow; sauce, saule, saule noir, 
sauz (Espanol), swamp walnut, weide, wilg, willow, and 
willow catkins 
  
The name willow derives from the Old English wilwe.  
The botanical name Salix was the name given by the 
ancient Romans. 
 
Uses 
Conservation:  One of the greatest services of the willows 
is as a soil-binder.  Growing along the banks of countless 
streams, their fibrous roots help to prevent the soil from 
being washed away.  Willow has been planted frequently 
to help stabilize the banks of eroding streams, to hold the 
soil in road cuts and embankments, and to bind shifting 
sands. Black willows dense root system is excellent for 
stabilizing eroding lands (Pitcher and McKnight, 1990). 
 
Ethnobotanic: The ancient Greeks knew the therapeutic 
values of willow.  Tea made from willow bark was used 
for stiff joints and rheumatic pains. 
 
By  the 1840’s, chemists had isolated salicylic acid from 
willow and found it produced marked antipyretic (fever-
reducing) and analgesic (pain-killing) effects and 
“striking relief of acute articular rheumatism.”  Modern 

 

 
Dyeing Agent – A dye made from willow bark has good 
wash fastness and fair light fastness.  The bark also 
contains a natural catechol tanning agent used to prepare 
leather for tanning (Cameo.mfg.org, 2010).  The 
Patowatomi made a scarlet colored dye from the willows 
roots (Active Concepts, 2010).  The roots are also used to 
make a yellow dye for dyeing porcupine quills (Prindle, 
2010).  
 
Other – Rodent proof granaries (Anonymous No. 3, 
2008).   
 
Industry:  Most black willow lumber goes into shipping 
boxes, baskets, and other containers, and into furniture 
(especially kitchen cabinets) and caskets.  The lumber is 
sometimes used in building construction for roof and wall 
sheathing, and sub-flooring.  It has been used for making 
charcoal, slack cooperage, veneer, cutting boards, 
woodenware, sash, doors, and other millwork, and for 
paper pulp.  It is used sometimes as a core in hardwood 
plywood (Panshin and deZeeuw, 1980; Anonymous No. 
1, 2008).  
 
Wood characteristics:  The wood is of moderately light to 
light density (specific gravity approximately 0.34 green, 
.42 oven dry), moderately soft.  It does not splinter easily, 
which makes excellent wood for toys, crates, and barn 
floors.  When properly seasoned, it warps very little.  The 
heartwood is grayish-brown or reddish-brown color, often 
with darker streaks along the grain.  Sapwood is whitish 
or creamy yellow (Panshin and deZeeuw, 1980).  The 
wood is uniformly textured, grain somewhat interlocking, 
and has no characteristic odor or taste (Anonymous No. 4, 
2008). 
 
Ornamental: Black willow can be planted as an 
ornamental where a fine-textured shade tree is desired.  It 
will tolerate dry soils with reduced vigor (Ohio Trees, 
2008). 
 
Wildlife: The willows are among the first plants to 
provide honey bees, after long winters, with nectar and 
pollen.  Domestic grazing animals browse in willow 
thickets.  Elk and beaver browse on willow leaves in the 
summer and willow twigs in the winter.  Willow shoots 
are common food of beaver, hares, and rabbits.  Black 
willow and other willows are host plants for Viceroy and 
red-spotted purple butterflies (Anonymous No. 2, 2008)  
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General: About 90 species of Salix are native to North 
America, but only 27 of them attain tree size, of which, 

 

 

black willow is the most abundant.  Most of the 
commercial willow timber is produced by S. nigra 
(Pitcher and McKnight, 1990).  A member of the Willow 
Family (Salicaceae), black willow is a small to medium-
sized tree 30 to 60 ft high and about 14 inches in diameter 
(max. 140 by 9 ft) with a broad, irregular crown and a 
superficial root system (Dirr, 1977).  The leaves are 
simple, alternate, deciduous; narrow, lance-shaped, with 
tapered tip, rounded base, 5-13 cm long, 8-12 mm wide; 
finely toothed margin; blade yellow-green on both sides 
with a few small hairs on the lower surface; petiole 
slender, 6-10 mm long.  The bark is dark gray-brown to 
nearly blackish, divided into deep fissures separating 
thick, interlacing, sometimes scaly ridges (Harlow et al., 
1979).  Black willow is named for its dark gray-brown 
bark (Nix, 2010). 

 

Black willow bark  
 
Twigs are light-red, slender, and flexible.  Buds narrow, 
conical, orange-brown; leaf scars narrow, crescent 
shaped; broad, flat, often shaggy ridges; pith pale brown, 
small.  Flowers of black willow:  male and female catkins 
on separate trees.  Catkins are 4-5 cm long, on ends of 
leafy shoots, many small, yellow-green flowers without 
petals (Stephens, 1969).   

Black Willow 
Catkins 

 

 
The biggest tree, a champion black willow, according to 
The American Forestry Association’s Hall of Fame for 
Trees was in Traverse City, Michigan, with a 
circumference at breast height of 7.9 m (26 ft-1 in), a 
height of 25.9 m (85 ft), and a spread of 24.1 m (79 ft) 
(American Forests, 2008).  The estimated life span for 
black willow averages 65 years with a range of 40 to 100 
years (Stringer, 2006). 

Flowering and Fruiting: Black willow flowers between 
February and April in the southern part of its range and as 
late as May or June in the northern part.  Flowers usually 
appear with the leaves.  The trees begin to bear fruit at 
about 10 years of age; however, optimum seed-bearing 
age ranges from 25 to 75 years.  The mature seeds fall 
between April and July (Fowells, 1965). 
 
Distribution:  Black willow ranges from New Brunswick 
to Manitoba, south to Florida and Texas (Steyermark, 
1963).  For current distribution, please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Habitat: This species is usually found on moist or wet 
soils along banks of streams, lakes, swamps around farm 
ponds, and pasture sloughs (Stephens, 1969).  
 
Adaptation 
Black willow ranges over most of the eastern half of the 
United States and attains tree size throughout the greater 
part of its range, commercial production of its lumber 
occurs mainly in the alluvial bottomlands of the lower 
Mississippi River.  The species grows best where the 
average annual rainfall is 51 inches, of which 20 inches 
falls during the growing season, April through August.  
The willow survives temperature extremes of 115ºF to -
50ºF in parts of its range.  Typically, the average 
maximum is 93ºF in summer and 60ºF in winter (Fowells, 
1965). 
 

 

Photo Courtesy of Chris Hoag, Wetland Plant Ecologist, USDA NRCS, 
Aberdeen Plant Materials Center 
 
Establishment  
Black willow is easily established from cuttings.  
Stringent requirements of seed germination and seedling 
establishment limit black willow to wet soils, especially 
flood plains where it grows in pure stands near water 
courses (Pitcher and McKnight, 1990).  
 
Management 
Stands of black willow can stagnate if not properly 
thinned.  A light thinning to remove understory trees 
should occur early and frequently to forestall stagnation 
and mortality.  Avoid over thinning as open stands are 

subject to heavy windthrow and stem breakage.  A proper 
thinning should leave a stand of about 65-75 square feet 
of basal area per acre (Fowells, 1965). 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
A number of insect species attack black willow but few 
cause serious damage.  Forest tent capterpillar 
(Malacosoma disstria), gypsy moth (Lymantria dispar), 
cotton wood leaf beetle (Chrysomela scripta), willow 
sawfly (Nematus ventralis), and the imported willow leaf 
beetle (Plagiodera versicolora) sometimes partially, 
occasionally completely, defoliate willow trees, reducing 
growth but seldom killing.   Stem borers, such as the 
cottonwood borer (Plectrodera scalator) attack willows 
and may kill by girdling the base.  Twig borers such as 
the willow-branch borer (Oberea ferruginea), feed on the 
branches and cause deformities that may be undesirable in 
ornamentals (Pitcher and McKnight, 1990).   
 
A number of diseases plaguing willows are transmitted by 
insects.  Willow blight, Pollaccia saliciperda, is 
transmitted by borers of which Salix species are the only 
known hosts (Pitcher and McKnight, 1990).  Symptoms 
are dead leaves and shoots due to fungal infection with 
striking black spots on the leaves shoot tips blackened and 
shaped like hooks.  The damage can be so extensive that 
entire tree appears to have been denuded by feeding 
insects (Stihl, 2010).  Phytophthora cactorum causes 
bleeding canker, lesions on the lower trunk that discharge 
a dark-colored, often slimy liquid.  Confined to the 
phloem and cambium area, it can result in death if the 
canker girdles the trunk. Cytospora chrysosperma causes 
canker in poplar and willow.  Under forest conditions, 
cytospora canker is of little consequence but when trees 
become weakened by drought, competition, or neglect, 
losses can be heavy.  In nursery beds, losses of up to 75 
percent of cuttings have been reported.  Leaf rust caused 
by Melampsora spp. is common on seedlings throughout 
the range of black willow.  Mistletoes (Phoradendron 
spp.) damage and deform but seldom kill willows (Pitcher 
and McKnight, 1990). 
 
Droughts that lower the water table can cause serious 
mortality where willow tends to be shallow-rooted as on 
clay-capped alluvial soils (Fowells, 1965). 
 
Environmental Concerns 
None known 
 
Seeds and Plant Production  
Good seed crops occur almost every year with only a few 
interspersed poor crop years.  Failures resulting from late 
freezes after the flower buds have begun to open are rare.  
Large volumes of seed are produced with an average of 2 
to 3 million per pound.  The seeds are widely 
disseminated by wind and water.  When the seeds fall, the 
long silky hairs act as wings to carry the seed very long 
distances (Fowells, 1965). 

 

 

Willow seed must be collected as soon as it ripens and 
sown immediately.  Stem cuttings are highly desirable to 
propagate trees (Brinkman, 1974).  
 
Fire Effects 
Although fires are rare in the bottomland areas where 
black willow grows, black willow is very susceptible to 
fire.  Hot fires can kill entire stands of willows.  Slow, 
light fires can seriously wound willows, allowing wood 
rooting fungi to enter.  Young seedlings and saplings will 
be destroyed by fire.  Black willow will sprout at the base 
following fire (Tesky, 1992; Pitcher and McKnight, 
1990). 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) ‘Webb’ compact willow is a “strikingly 
different vase-shaped form of black willow. It forms a 
small, dense tree.  This unusual form occurred as a single 
tree on the farm of Mr. Charles Webb in Madison County, 
Florida” (Woodlanders, 2008). 
 
Contact your local Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) office for 
more information.  Look in the phone book under “United 
States Government.”  The Natural Resources 
Conservation Service will be listed under the subheading 
“Department of Agriculture.” 
 
Control  
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use it safely.  Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method. Trade names 
and control measures appear in this document only to 
provide specific information.  USDA, NRCS does not 
guarantee or warranty the products and control methods 
named, and other products may be equally effective. 
 
References 
 
Active Concepts.  2010.  ABS Willow Bark Extract.  
 
 
 
 
arnatural.org.  2010.  Willow-Nature’s Aspirin.  Univ. of 
 
 
 
Anonymous No. 1.  2008. Black willow wood properties 
 
 
 
Anonymous No. 2.  2008.  
 
 
 
 
 

Technical Data Sheet.  http://www.in-
cosmetics.com/ExhibitorLibrary/830/ABS_Willow_
Bark_Extract_Powder-Technical_Data_Sheet-
v5_3.pdf [online: cited 25 Feb 2010]. 

http://www.butterflygardeningandconservation.com/p
lant/host/s-nigra.php [online: cited 17 November 
2008]. 

Arkansas, Div. of Agriculture, Co-op Ext. Serv. 
http://www.arnatural.org/Wildfoods/Uses_Trees.htm 
[online: cited 25 Feb 2010]. 

by Connected Lines. 
http://www.connectedlines.com/wood/wood15.htm 
[online: cited 23 May 2008]. 

 

 

http://www.fourdir.com/southern_california_culture.
htm [online: cited 9 Dec 2008]. 

northamerica.com/willow.htm [online: cited 17 
November 2008]. 

Seeds of woody plants in the United States. USDA-
FS Agriculture Handbook No. 450. Washington, DC. 

http://cameo.mfa.org/browse/popup_print_material.as
p?materialid=10102&type=all 
[online: cited 25 Feb 2010]. 

Ethnobiological Studies in American Southwest II.  
The Ethnobiology of the Papago Indians.  Univ. of 
New Mexico Bull. 4(3): 1-84. 

Salix nigra. 
http://americanforests.org/resources/bigtrees/register.
php?details=623 [online: cited 23 May 2008]. 

Their Identification, Ornamental Characteristics, 
Culture, Progation and Uses.  Stipes Publishing Co., 
Champaign, Ill. 

Anonymous No. 3.  2008.  Southern California Culture 
 
 
Anonymous No. 4.  2008. http://www.exotichardwoods-
 
 
American Forests, National Tree Register of Big Trees: 
 
 
 
Brinkman, K. A. 1974.  In Schopmeyer, C.S. Tech. Cord. 
 
 
Cameo.mfg.org. 2010.  Material Name: willow bark.  
 
 
 
Castetter, E. F. and R. M. Underhill.  1935.  
 
 
 
Dirr, M. A.  1977.  Manual of Woody Landscape Plants: 
 
 
 
Fowells, H. A.  1965.  Silvics of Forest Trees of the 
United States.  Agriculture Handbook No. 271. 
 
 
USDA Forest Service, Washington, DC. 
Hamel, P. B. and M. U. Chiltoskey.  1975.  Cherokee 
 
 
Harlow, W. H., E. S. Harrar, and F. M. White. 1979.  p. 
224-225. In Textbook of Dendrology. Sixth Edition. 
 
  McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York.  
Herrick, J. W.  1977.  Iroquois Medical Botany.  State 
 
Mausert, O.  1932.  Herbs for Heath.   
 
 
Ohio Trees 2008. 
 
 
Nix, s.  2010.  Black Willow, A Common Tree In 
 
Http://forestry.about.com/od/hardwoods/tp/salix_nigr
 
Panshin, A.J. and C. deZeeuw. 1980. p. 547-549. In 
 
 
 
Pitcher, J. A. and J. S. McKnight. 1990.  Salix nigra 
  Marsh. Black Willow.  In Silvics of North America. 
 
 
 
Prindle, T.  2010.  Natural Dyes for Porcupine Quills.  
http://www.nativetech.org/quill/dyes.html [online: 
 
 
cited 25 Feb 2010]. 
 

USDA-FS Agriculture Handbook No. 654. 
http://www.na.fs.fed.us/spfo/pubs/silvics_manual/vol
ume_2/Salix/nigra.htm [online: cited 14 Nov 2008]. 

Textbook of wood technology, 4th Edition. McGraw-
Hill Series in Forest Resources. McGraw-Hill Book 
Company, New York.  

Plants and Their Uses – A 400 Year History.  Herald 
Publ. Co., Sylva, N.C. 

www.meridianinstitute.com/echerb/Files/classics/ma
usert/matmedin.html [online: cited 25 Feb 2010]. 

http://www.ohiodnr.com/forestry/trees/willow_black/
tabid/5432/Default.aspx [online: cited 14 Nov 2008]. 

Univ. of New York, Albany, PhD Thesis. 

North America. 

a.htm 

[online: cited 5 mar 2010]. 

Kansas. Univ. Press of Kansas, Lawrence.  

University Press, Ames, Iowa.  

http://www.stihl.com [online: cited 4 Mar 2010]. 

Enjoying Our Trees. American Forestry Association. 
P. 101-107. 

Northeastern Algonguians.  Proceedings of the 19th 
International Congress of Americanists.   

harvests. Professional Hardwood Notes SP 679. 
http://www.uky.edu/Ag/Forestry/extension/pub/pdf/f
or103.pdf [online: cited 9 Dec 2008]. 

Randall, C. E. 1969. A willow grows aslant a brook. 
 
 
Speck, F. G.  1917.  Medicine Practices of the 
 
 
Speck, F. G.  1941.  A List of Plant Curatives Obtained 
 
From the Houma Indians of Louisiana.  Primitive 
  Man 14:49-75. 
Stephens, H.A. 1969.  Trees, Shrubs, and Woody Vines of 
 
Steyermark, J. A. 1963. Flora of Missouri. Iowa State 
 
Stihl. 2010.  Encyclopaedia of tree diseases.  
 
Stringer, J. 2006.  Two-age system and deferment 
 
 
 
Taylor, L. A.  1940.  Plants Used As Curatives by Certain 
Southeastern Tribes.  Botanical Museum of Harvard 
 
 
Univ. Cambridge, MA. 
Tesky, J.  1992.  Salix nigra.  In Fire Effects Information 
 
System, [Online].  USDA-FS Rocky Mountain Exp. 
Sta., Fire Sciences Laboratory (Producer).  
 
http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/plants/tree/salnig/a
 
 
ll.html [online: cited 18 Nov 2008]. 
Woodlanders. 2008.  Salix nigra “Webb” Willow, Webb, 
 
 
 
 
 
Prepared By 
John M. Row 
USDA NRCS, Manhattan Plant Materials Center, 
Manhattan, Kansas 
 
Wayne A. Geyer 
Forestry Division, Kansas State University, Manhattan, 
Kansas 

compact from Woodlanders, Inc. 
http://www.woodlanders.net/index.cfm?fuseaction=pl
ants.plantdetail&plant_id=229 [online: cited 17 nov 
2008]. 

Published June 2010 
Edited: 
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

