SALTMEADOW 
CORDGRASS 

Spartina patens (Aiton) Muhl. 

Plant Symbol = SPPA 

USDA NRCS National Plant Materials Center 
Beltsville, MD 

Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Rose Lake Plant Materials 
Center.  

Alternate Names 
Marshhay cordgrass 

Uses 
Saltmeadow cordgrass is used for shoreline protection and 
tidal  marsh  restorations,  and  is  often  utilized  for  levee 
stabilization and dune stabilization plantings near coastal 
beaches and on barrier islands. It is an important species 
for  dissipating  wave  energy  in  low  topography  relief 
coastlines  (Stallins,  2002).  Saltmeadow  cordgrass  is  an 
effective stabilizer used on interior mud flats, dredge fill 
sites,  and  other  areas  of  loose  and  unconsolidated  soils 
associated  with  marsh  restoration  (Burger  and  Shisler, 
1983).  However, saltmeadow cordgrass colonies can be 
barried and killed by sand accumulation of 3 feet or more 
(Courtemanche et al., 1999).  Saltmeadow cordgrass  has 
been  observed    to  inhibit  the  spread  of  aggressive 
  Encroachment  of  Phragmites 
rhizomatous  species. 
australis  was  blocked  by  saltmeadow  cordgrass 
in 
restored  marshes  in  New  Jersey  (Wang  et  al.,  2006). 

 

 

 

Plant Guide

Saltmeadow  cordgrass  may  play  an  important  role  for 
remediating  and  restoring  marshes  after  oil  spills.  
Saltmeadow  cordgrass  dominated  coastal  wetlands  are 
predicted  to  recover  from  oil  spills  without  additional 
intervention procedures (DeLaune et al., 2003). 
Saltmeadow  cordgrass  also  provides  food  and  cover  to 
many terrestrial and aquatic species of wildlife including 
muskrats,  nutria, rabbits, ducks,  white-footed  mouse and 
meadow  vole  (Stutzenbaker,  1999;  Abuzeineh  et  al., 
2007). In Canada, saltmeadow cordgrass is known to be a 
larval  host  of  the  endangered  maritime  ringlet  butterfly 
(Sei,  2009).  Saltmeadow  cordgrass  is  considered  an 
important forage species to livestock producers along the 
gulf  coast  (Stutzenbaker,  1999)  and  is  cut  and  dried  for 
hay  in  New  England  and  Newfoundland  (Stalter,  2003).  
This species is the primary component of salt hay, which 
is utilized in the landscape and vegetable trade industry as 
weed seed free mulch. 

Status 
Please  consult  the  PLANTS  Web  site  and  your  State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status  (e.g.,  threatened  or  endangered  species,  state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

in  Washington 

Weediness 
This  plant  may  become  weedy  or  invasive  in  some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation 
if  not  properly  managed.    It  is  considered  an  invasive 
plant 
(Washington 
Administrative Code, 2005; Oregon Dept. of Agriculture, 
2006). Please consult with your local NRCS Field Office, 
Cooperative  Extension  Service  office,  or  state  natural 
resource or agriculture department regarding its status and 
use.    Weed  information  is  also  available  from  the 
PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov. 

and  Oregon 

tall,  and  spreads  extensively  by 

Description 
This  warm  season,  native,  perennial  grows  from  1  to  4 
feet 
long  slender 
rhizomes.  Dark green stems  emerge  from the rhizomes.  
The rolled leaf blades are typically 1/2 to 1 foot long, and 
0.1 to 0.2 inches wide.  Leaf blades are shiny, dark green 
on the upper surface and rough  with prominent veins on 
the  lower  surface.    Leaves  are  drooping  and  wiry  in 
appearance.  From late June to October an inflorescence 
emerges at the end of the stem, which is composed of 2 to 
10 two-inch-long spikelets.  The numerous florets are 0.3 
to 0.4 inches long and arranged in an overlapping scale-
like  fashion  on  each  spikelet.    The  flowers  are  wind 
pollinated  and  self-sterile  (Barkworth,  2003;  Gould, 
1975). 

 

Distribution:   
Saltmarsh cordgrass has been observed from the Atlantic 
shorelines in Newfoundland,  Canada to the coastlines of 
Florida  and  Texas  and  as  far  south  as  Quintana  Roo  in 
Mexico  (Stalter,  1993;  Gould,  1975;  Sauer,  1967).  
Saltmarsh  cordgrass  has  also  been  observed  along  Lake 
Huron  in  Michigan  (Voss,  1972).    It  also  occurs  in 
Oregon and Washington where it is considered invasive. 
For  current  distribution,  please  consult  the  Plant  Profile 
page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 

Adaptation 
Saltmeadow  cordgrass  is  commonly  found  growing  in 
saline to brackish marshes, sandy beaches and low dunes, 
tidal flats and marsh ridges.  It can inhabit foredunes and 
primary  dunes,  and  can  survive 
in  saturated  soil 
conditions (Stalter, 1974; Stalter and  Lamont, 1997; van 
der Valk, 1975).  This grass is adapted to a wide range of 
soils from coarse sands to silty clay sediments with a pH 
range  of    4.5  to  7.1  (Martin,  1959).    Saltmeadow 
cordgrass will tolerate irregular inundations with 0 to 35 
parts per thousand salinity and the concentration required 
for 50% above ground tissue death is about 65 parts per 
thousand (Hester et al., 2005).  Leaf blades have a thick 
cuticle  and  usually  are  involute  when  fully  developed 
which  helps  protect  the  plant  from  salt  spray  injury 
(Oosting, 1945). 

Establishment 
Saltmeadow cordgrass is usually established by vegetative 
means.    Depending  on  the  energy  affecting  the  planting 
site, either containerized (high impact sites) or bare root 
(mild  impact  sites)  plants  can  be  utilized.    Bare  root 
material  should  contain  3  to  5  stems  perplanting  unit, 
while containers should have at least 5 to 8 healthy stems.  
Bare root plugs are generally limited to planting sites that 
are exposed to little or no wave energy.  Since most marsh 
sites are irregular and difficult to access, hand planting is 
normally  employed,  using  spades,  dibbles,  or  planting 
bars.  If site conditions are right, planting can be carried 
out  with a  mechanical, tractor drawn transplanter.  Plant 
spacing should be between 18 and 36 inches; up to 2 feet 
of  lateral  spread  can  be  expected  annually  (Craig,  1991; 
USDA, 2007). 

Pests and Potential Problems 
The  toxic  ascomycete  ergot  (Claviceps  purpurea)  has 
been  observed  to  parasitize  the  ovaries  of  saltmeadow 
cordgrass.  The infection can be transferred to other grass 
species  including  big  cordgrass  (Spartina  cynosuroides) 
and  smooth  cordgrass  (Spartina  alterniflora)  (Eleuterius 
and Meyers, 1974). 

Environmental Concerns 
None at this time. 

Control 
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 

 

 

area  and  how  to  use  it  safely.    Always  read  label  and 
safety instructions for each control method. 

cordgrass 

commonly 

Seeds and Plant Production 
Saltmeadow 
propagated 
is 
vegetatively.  It  has  little  ability  to  spread  through  seed 
production and the seedlings have low vigor.  In nursery 
rows, plants of saltmeadow cordgrass should be spaced 6 
to 12 inches apart.  Under ideal nursery conditions, each 
planting unit should be able to yield up to 50 stems in a 
single growing season.  Effective weed control is essential 
to producing quality plants. 
 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
Saltmeadow cordgrass is easily found in nurseries, garden 
stores and other plant dealers and distributors. There are 
several  named  cultivars  available  on  the  commercial 
market.    In  1986,  ‘Avalon’  (New  Jersey)  saltmeadow 
cordgrass was released for use in the coastal area north of 
the  Carolinas  by  the  Cape  May  Plant  Material  Center 
(PMC),  in  Cape  May  Court  House,  New  Jersey.    Soon 
after,  ‘Flageo’  (North  Carolina)  was  released  by  the 
Americus, Georgia and Brooksville, Florida PMCs for use 
on southern Atlantic and Gulf coasts.  ‘Sharp’ (Louisiana) 
was  released  in  1994  by  the  Florida  and  Georgia  PMCs 
for coastal back dune stabilization in the southern Atlantic 
and Gulf coast counties from Florida to Texas.  It is also 
suited  for  use  in  inland  areas  from  southern  Georgia  to 
southern  Arkansas  to  stabilize  shorelines,  gullies,  road 
banks, mine spoils, saline oil seep areas, and for nutrient 
reclamation  in  agricultural  and  municipal  waste  water 
irrigated  fields. 
  In  2003,  ‘Gulf  Coast’  marshhay 
cordgrass  was  released  from  the  Golden  Meadow  PMC 
near Galliano, Louisiana  for  marsh restoration,  shoreline 
and  levee  stabilization,  stabilizing  dredge  fill  sites,  and 
restoration of coastal beaches and dunes. ‘Gulf Coast’ is 
found  to  be  adapted  to  the  coastal  areas  of  Louisiana, 
Mississippi, and Texas. 

References 
Abuzeineh,  A.  A.,  R.  D.  Owen,  N.  E.  McIntyre,  C.  W. 
Dick,  R.  E.  Strauss,  and  T.  Holsomback.    2007.  
Response  of  marsh  rice  rat  (Oryzomys  palustris)  to 
inundation  of  habitat. 
  Southwestern  Naturalist 
52(1):75-78. 

  2003. 

Barkworth,  M.  E. 

  Spartina  Schreb. 

  In:  
Barkworth,  M.  E.,  K.  M.  Capels,  S.  Long,  and  M.  B. 
Piep  eds.    Magnoliophyta:    Commelinidae  (in  Part):  
Poaceae,  Part  2,  Flora  of  North  America  North  of 
Mexico,  Volume  25.    New  York:    Oxford  University 
Press.  240 – 250. 

Burger,  J.  and  J.  Shisler.    1983.    Succession  and 
productivity  on  perturbed  and  natural  Spartina  salt-
marsh areas in New Jersey.  Estuaries 6(1)50-56. 

Courtemanche  Jr,  R.  P.,  M.  W.  Hester,  and  I.  A. 
Mendelssohn.    1999.    Recovery  of  a  Louisiana  marsh 

plant community following extensive hurricane-induced 
overwash.  Journal of Coastal Research 15(4):872-883. 
Craig, R. M.  1991.  Plants for coastal dunes of the Gulf 
and  South  Atlantic  Coasts  and  Puerto  Rico.    USDA-
Natural  Resources  Conservation  Service.    Agriculture 
information Bulletin 460.  41pp. 

DeLaune, R. D., S. R. Pezeshki, A. Jugsujinda, and C. W. 
Lindau.    2003.    Sensitivity  of  US  Gulf  of  Mexico 
coastal  marsh  vegetation  to  crude  oil:    comparison  of 
greenhouse  and  field  responses.    Aquatic  Ecology 
37(4):351-360. 

Eleuterius,  L.  N.  and  S.  P.  Meyers.    1974.    Claviceps 
purpurea  on  Spartina  in  coastal  marshes.    Mycologia 
66(6):978-986. 

Gould,  F.  W.    1975.    The  Grasses  of  Texas.    College 
Station, Texas.  Texas A&M University Press.  653 pp. 

Hester, M. W., E. A. Spalding, and D. D. Franze.  2005.  
Biological resources of the Louisiana coast:  Part 1.  An 
overview of coastal plant communities of the Louisiana 
Gulf  shoreline.    Journal  of  Coastal  Research  Special 
Issue No. 44:134-145. 

Martin,  W.  E.    1959.    The  vegetation  of  Island  Beach 

State Park.  Ecological Monographs 29(1):2-46. 

Oosting, H. J.  1945.  Tolerance to salt spray of plants of 

coastal dunes.  Ecology 26(1):85-89. 

and 

Oregon Department of Agriculture.  2006.  Noxious weed 
policy 
system. 
http://www.oregon.gov/ODA/PLANT/WEEDS/Pages/li
sts.aspx.  Oregon Department of Agriculture.  Verified 
25 February, 2013. 

classification 

Sauer, J.  1967.  Geographic reconnaissance of  seashore 
vegetation  along  the  Mexican  Gulf  Coast.    Baton 
Rouge,  Louisiana:    Louisiana  State  University  Press.  
59pp. 

ringlet 

Sei,  M.    2009.    Flight  and  oviposition  behavior  of  the 
(Coenonympha  nipisiquit 
adult  maritime 
McDunnough)  females  in  response  to  microhabitat.  
Journal of Insect Behavior 22(2): 87-100. 

Stallins,  J.  A.    2002.    Dune  plant  species  diversity  and 
function  in  two  barrier  island  biogeomorphic  systems.  
Plant Ecology 165:183-196. 

Stalter,  R.    1974.    Vegetation  in  coastal  dunes  in  South 

Carolina.  Castanea 39(1): 95-103. 

Stalter,  R. 

  1993. 

  The 
Southeastern  United  States.    Dubuque,  Iowa:  Wm. 
Brown.  164pp. 

  Barrier  Island  Botany. 

Stalter,  R.    2003.    Barrier  Island  Botany  –  A  Guide  to 
Barrier Island Plants from Cape Cod, Massachusetts to 
Assateague 
  Fort  Washington, 
Pennsylvania:  Eastern National.  72pp. 

Island,  Virginia. 

Stalter,  R.  and  E.  E.  Lamont.    1997.    Flora  of  North 
Carolina’s  Outer  Banks,  Ocracoke  Island  to  Virginia.  
Journal of the Torrey Botanical Society 124(1): 71-88. 

 

Stutzenbaker, D. D.  1999.  Aquatic and Wetland Plants in 
the Western Gulf Coast.  Austin, Texas:  University of 
Texas Press.  465 pp. 

USDA.    2007.    Planting  Guide  for  Establishing  Coastal 
Vegetation  on  the  Mississippi  Gulf  Coast.    USDA-
Natural  Resources  Conservation  Service  Jamie  L. 
Whitten 
Plant  Materials  Center,  Coffeeville, 
Mississippi.  38pp. 

van der Valk. A. G.  1975.  The floristic composition and 
structure  of  foredune  plant  communities  of  Cape 
Hatteras  National  Seashore. 
  Chesapeake  Science 
16(2):115-126. 

Voss,  E.  G.    1972.    Michigan  Flora  –  A  Guide  to  the 
Identification 
and 
Naturalized Seed-Plants of the State.  Bloomfield Hills, 
Michigan: 
  Cranbrook  Institute  of  Science  and 
University of Michigan Herbarium.  488pp. 

and  Occurrence  of  Native 

  2006. 

Wang,  J.,  D.  M.  Seliskar,  J.  L.  Gallagher,  and  M.  T. 
  Blocking  Phragmites  australis 
League. 
reinvasion  of  restored  marshes  using  plants  selected 
from  wild  populations  and  tissue  culture.    Wetlands 
Ecology and Management 14(6):539-547. 

Washington  Administrative  Code.    2005.    State  noxious 
weed  list  and  schedule  of  monetary  penalties,  Chapter 
16-750.   
http://apps.leg.wa.gov/WAC/default.aspx?cite=16-750 .  
State of Washington.  Verified 25 February, 2013. 

 
Prepared By:  USDA Rose Lake Plant Materials Center.  
East Lansing, Michigan. 

Citation 
Leif,  J.    2013.  Plant  Guide  for  saltmeadow  cordgrass 
(Spartina 
Resources 
Conservation Service, Rose Lake Plant Materials Center.  
East Lansing, Michigan  48823 

USDA-Natural 

patens). 

Published March, 2013. 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact  your  local  NRCS  field  office  or  Conservation 
District  at  http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/  and  visit 
the 
PLANTS Web site at  http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials 
http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

Program  Web 

site 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

