 
 

 

Plant Guide

is a specialist pollinator of Sidalcea species (Leong, 
2006).   

Status 
Sidalcea virgata is listed as an endangered species in the 
state of Washington (WDNR, 2003).  Please consult the 
PLANTS Web site and your State Department of Natural 
Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., threatened 
or endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland 
indicator values). 

Description 
General:  Rose checker-mallow is a member of the 
mallow family (Malvaceae).  It is an herbaceous perennial 
that typically grows 8 to 40 inches tall (Hitchcock and 
Cronquist, 1961).  Plants have a strong taproot and short 
to trailing rhizomes (horizontal underground stems).  The 
aboveground stems are often trailing or reclining on the 
ground, freely root at the base, are generally not hollow, 
and are covered in soft, branched (stellate), fairly long 
hairs.  Leaf stems (petioles) are covered in dense, stellate 
hairs, and the upper surface of basal leaves is densely 
covered in short simple or forked hairs.  Basal leaves are 
generally palmate, while leaves along the stem are deeply 
divided.  Flower stalks are generally loose, often one-
sided, rarely branched (from 1-3 side branches), and have 
relatively few flowers (5-30) compared to other Sidalcea 
species in western Oregon (Gisler, 2003).   
This species is gynodioecious, meaning populations 
contain plants with hermaphrodite flowers (outcrossing 
and self-compatible), as well as plants that have only 
female flowers (obligate outcrossing) (Halse et al., 1989).  
Flowers have five petals that are rounded with a shallow 
notch at the tip, 5/8-1 inch (15-25 mm) long on perfect 
(bisexual) flowers and 3/8-1/2 inch (9-13 mm) on female 
flowers, and are pink to magenta (or sometimes white 
around Eugene, Oregon).  Carpels containing individual 
seeds are relatively large for checker-mallows (1/7-1/6 
inch, or 3.5-4 mm) and have a very rough, deeply net-  

Native Eucerine bee visiting rose checker-mallow flowers. Photo by A. 
Bartow, Corvallis Plant Materials Center, 2009. 

 

ROSE CHECKER-

MALLOW 

Sidalcea virgata Howell 

Plant Symbol = SIVI3 

Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials 
Center, Oregon 

 

Photo by Amy Bartow, Corvallis Plant Materials Center, 2011. 

Alternate Names 
Alternate Common Names:  wild hollyhock, showy wild 
hollyhock, virgate checkerbloom, rosy checkermallow, 
dwarf checkerbloom 
Alternate Scientific Names:  Sidalcea malviflora (DC.) A. 
Gray ex Benth. ssp. virgata (Howell) C.L. Hitchc., 
Sidalcea malviflora (DC.) A. Gray ex Benth. var. virgata 
(Howell) Dimling, Sidalcea malviflora (DC.) A. Gray ex 
Benth. ssp. asprella (Greene) C.L. Hitchc. var. virgata  

Uses 
Prairie restoration: Rose checker-mallow is a native 
wildflower used in prairie restoration plantings as an 
important member of a diverse native plant community. 
Pollinator habitat: Rose checker-mallow flowers are one 
of the primary nectar sources for the federally endangered 
Fender’s blue butterfly, Icaricia icarioides fenderi 
(Wilson et al., 1997).  It is also a suspected host plant for 
the West Coast painted lady Vanessa annabella, common 
checkered skipper Pyrgus communis, and two-banded 
checkered skipper Pyrgus ruralis (Newhouse, 2001).  
Flowers of Sidalcea species are a source of pollen and 
nectar for European honeybees (LCBA, 2012), as well as 
native bees and other beneficial insects (Newhouse, 
2009).  There is one native bee (Diadasia nigrifrons) that 

 

veined surface.  Seeds are dispersed by water, wind and 
gravity.  Plants flower May to June and seed generally 
ripens by late June to mid-July.  
Rose checker-mallow has the same geographic 
distribution and pollinators as three other checker-
mallows (S. campestris, S. cusickii, and S. nelsoniana), 
but hybridization with these species is generally 
discouraged in the wild by different flowering times, as S. 
virgata starts earlier and usually finishes flowering by the 
time the other three begin (Gisler, 2004).  Differences in 
chromosome numbers may also help discourage inter-
species crossing, although tetraploid populations of S. 
virgata in its northern range are thought to be hybrids of 
diploid S. virgata (currently found in its southern range) 
and hexaploid S. campestris (Whittall et al., 2000).  Both 
S. cusickii and S. nelsoniana are diploids.   

Distribution:  Rose checker-mallow is found throughout 
the inland valleys and foothills of western Oregon, 
especially in the Willamette Valley, and north into 
southwestern Washington.  For current distribution, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species on 
the PLANTS Web site. 

Habitat:  This species grows in moderately wet to very 
dry and upland (usually sloping) habitats including moist 
meadows, fields and lower mountains, as well as along 
roadsides and on grassy hillsides (Gisler, 2004; Hitchcock 
and Cronquist, 1961). 

Ethnobotany 
There are no known ethnobotanic uses of this plant. 

Adaptation 
Rose checker-mallow is adapted to sites that are 
seasonally saturated in the winter to early spring, but the 
species is also fairly drought-tolerant. 

Establishment 
For restoration plantings, proper weed control and site 
preparation (tilling to create a clean, firm seed bed) are 
critical for good establishment and long-term survival 
(Schultz, 2001).  Seeds are not dormant but appear to 
benefit from scarification prior to sowing based on 
observations at the Corvallis Plant Materials Center.  
Seeds sown in the fall will germinate naturally in late fall 
to late winter.  Seed can be broadcast at a single-species 
rate of 4 to 6 lb/ac, but should be proportionally reduced 
in a prairie restoration mix depending on the other species 
used, site conditions, and desired outcome.  There are 
75,000-150,000 seeds per pound, so one pound of pure 
live seed spread over one acre will result in approximately 
0.3 to 0.6 seeds per square foot, depending on seed size. 
Experimental seedings with 50% forb and 50% grass seed 
(S. virgata density of 15 seeds/ft2) showed better 
establishment than mixes composed of 10% forb and 90% 
grass seed (S. virgata density of 8 seeds/ft2) (Schultz, 

 

 

2001).  This species can also be established from 
transplanted plugs or rhizomes in the fall or spring.   

Management 
Rose checker-mallow occurs in prairie and meadow 
habitats that were historically maintained by fire, so fire 
may be an important tool in managing appropriate habitat 
for this species (WDNR, 2003).  Conifer and non-native 
shrub encroachment can displace native prairie forbs from 
their historical distribution. 

Pests and Potential Problems 
Seed weevil larvae (Macrorhoptus spp.) have decimated 
yields some years in seed production fields at the 
Corvallis Plant Materials Center.  Vole, mouse, and rabbit 
predation and leaf rust can also be detrimental to seed 
production of this species. 

Environmental Concerns 
When collecting/growing out seed and planning 
restoration projects, care should be taken to avoid 
introducing S. virgata outside of its naturally occurring 
geographic range, as this may increase the likelihood of 
inter-specific hybridization with other Willamette Valley 
checker-mallows.  It is also recommended to avoid 
combining populations of rose checker-mallow with 
different chromosome numbers in a single grow-out 
(populations can be either diploid [2n=20] or tetraploid 
[2n=40]; Alverson, 2006; Hitchcock and Kruckeberg, 
1957).     

Seed production field of rose checker-mallow on weed fabric at the 
Corvallis Plant Materials Center. Photo by A. Bartow, 2009. 

 

Seeds and Plant Production 
Field Establishment & Maintenance: For seed production, 
this species is best established from transplanted plugs in 
the fall or spring.  Transplanting plugs creates cleaner 
fields and results in an established productive field in the 
first growing season.  If direct seeding, sow in the fall or 
spring at a depth of ¼ to ½ inch and a rate of 4 to 6 lb/ac 
on 24- to 36-inch row spacing (approximately 30 seeds 
per square foot).  For smaller plots, it is beneficial to plant 
into weed fabric for easier harvest and weed control.  
Larger plots may be grown without fabric, but yields may 
suffer.  Plants respond well to additional nitrogen.  Plants 
that were fertilized with 50 lb N/ac in spring at the 

Corvallis PMC had a longer bloom time and higher rates 
of filled seed.  Fields established from plugs can be 
harvested the first year, but yields usually peak between 
years two and three, and are maintained for many years.  
Field longevity is over five years.   
Seed Harvest: Plants typically have highly variable seed 
maturation.  It is common to find single plants that 
simultaneously have flower buds, open flowers, immature 
seed, and shattered seed pods.  It can be difficult to 
determine an optimal harvest time if harvesting a field 
that does not have weed fabric.  For highest yields, direct 
combine fields with weed fabric when latest maturing 
seed is in hard dough stage.  Catch debris as it comes out 
of the back of the combine on a tarp and dump offsite.  
After combining, use a flail-vac harvester (seed stripper) 
to sweep up all the seed remaining on the weed fabric.  If 
weed fabric is not used, direct combine field when most 
seed is between soft dough and hard dough stage.  Dry all 
material on tarps after harvest.   
Seed Conditioning: Harvesting with a combine will 
separate seed from most other plant material.  For smaller 
plots where a combine cannot be used, a thresher would 
provide the same service.  Seeds are then sent through an 
air-screen machine to separate remaining plant debris 
from seed.  Some seed lots contain a high amount of 
unfilled seed, so be sure to check inside the hulls for seed 
fill.  Yields range from 130 to 270 pounds per acre at the 
Corvallis PMC. 
Container Production: At the Corvallis Plant Materials 
Center, seeds are sown into 7-cubic-inch Ray Leach 
“Cone-tainers” filled with Sunshine Mix #1 (a soil less 
peat-based media) amended with micro-nutrients 
(Micromax) and a slow-release fertilizer (Osmocote 14-
14-14).  Flats are placed in a greenhouse set at moderate 
temperatures (70°F days/50°F nights).  Seeds generally 
germinate within one to two weeks, with germination 
rates around 60%.  Plugs are usually ready to harden off 
and plant out in about 4 to 6 months.    

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
There are no developed cultivars of rose checker-mallow, 
but seed and plant materials are sometimes available from 
commercial sources in Oregon. 

References 
Alverson, E. 2006. Taxonomy and variation of some 

Willamette Valley prairie plants: a plant taxonomist’s 
perspective on seed collection. Presentation for the 
workshop “Addressing Seed Transfer Issues in the 
Willamette Valley” on 22 Mar 2006 in Corvallis, OR. 
Available at http://www.nativeseednetwork.org/ 
article_view?id=33 (accessed 23 Mar 2012). The 
Nature Conservancy, Eugene, OR. 

Gisler, S.D. 2003. Reproductive isolation and 

interspecific hybridization in the threatened species, 
Sidalcea nelsoniana. Unpublished Master’s thesis. 

 

 

Dept. of Botany and Plant Pathology, Oregon State 
Univ., Corvallis.  

Gisler, S.D. 2004. Developing biogeographically based 

population introduction protocols for at-risk 
Willamette Valley plant species. Report to US Fish 
and Wildlife Service, Portland, OR. Available at 
http://www.fws.gov/oregonfwo/Species/Data/Nelson
NelsonsChecker/Documents/ODA2004ReportSidalc
ReportSid.pdf (accessed 15 Mar 2012). Native Plant 
Conservation Program, Oregon Dept. of Agriculture, 
Salem. 

Halse, R.R., B.A. Rottink, and R. Mishaga. 1989. Studies 
in Sidalcea taxonomy. Northwest Science 63(4):154-
161. 

Hitchcock, C.L., and A. Cronquist. 1961. Vascular plants 

of the Pacific Northwest, Part 3: Saxifragaceae to 
Ericaceae. Univ. of Washington Press, Seattle. 

Hitchcock, C.L., and A.R. Kruckeberg. 1957. A study of 

the perennial species of Sidalcea. Univ. of 
Washington Publ. Biol. 18:1-96. 

LBCA (Lane County Beekeepers Association). 2012. 
Native plants attractive to honeybees. Available at 
http://www.lcbaor.org/Supportfiles/nativeplants_for_
honeybees.pdf (accessed 23 Mar 2012). LCBA, 
Eugene, OR. 

Leong, J. 2006. Bird-foot checkerbloom (Sidalcea 

pedata) reserve design criteria: reproductive potential 
in a fragmented environment. Section 6 project final 
report to California Dept. of Fish and Game. 
Available at nrm.dfg.ca.gov/FileHandler.ashx? 
DocumentVersionID=40672 (accessed 26 Mar 2012). 
Biological Sciences Dept., California State 
Polytechnic University, Pomona. 

Newhouse, B. 2009. Native plants frequented by native 
bees in the Willamette Valley Ecoregion, Oregon. 
Available at http://salixassociates.com/pdf/NativeBee 
Plants.pdf (accessed 24 Mar 2012). Salix Associates, 
Eugene, OR. 

Newhouse, B. 2001. Willamette Valley butterflies and 

native host plants. Available at 
http://www.naba.org/chapters/nabaes/btrfly-
gdng2.html (accessed 23 Mar 2012). NABA Eugene-
Springfield Chapter, Eugene, OR. 

Schultz, C.B. 2001. Restoring resources for an 

endangered butterfly. Journal of Applied Ecology 
38:1007–1019. 

WDNR (Washington Dept. of Natural Resources). 2003. 
Sidalcea malviflora ssp. virgata rose checker mallow. 
Available at http://www1.dnr.wa.gov/nhp/refdesk/ 
fguide/pdf/sidmsi.pdf (accessed 26 Mar 2012). 
WDNR, Washington Natural Heritage Program and 
BLM, Olympia. 

Whittall, J., A. Liston, S. Gisler, and R.J. Meinke. 2000. 

Detecting nucleotide additivity from direct sequences 
is a SNAP: an example from Sidalcea (Malvaceae). 
Plant Biology 2:211-217. 

Wilson, M.V., P.C. Hammond, and C.B. Schultz. 1997. 
The interdependence of native plants and Fender’s 
blue butterfly. Pp. 83-87 in T.N. Kaye, A. Liston, 

R.M. Love, D. Luomo, R.J. Meinke, and M.V. 
Wilson (ed.) Conservation and management of native 
flora and fungi. Native Plant Society of Oregon, 
Corvallis. 

Prepared By:   
Annie Young-Mathews, Conservation Agronomist 
USDA NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials Center, Oregon 

Citation 
Young-Mathews, A. 2012. Plant guide for rose checker-
mallow (Sidalcea virgata). USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Plant Materials Center, Corvallis, 
OR. 

 

Published May 2012 
Edited: 26Mar2012 dcd; 27Mar2012 ab; 17Apr2012 jab; 27Apr2012 gm   

For more information about this and other plants, please contact your 
local NRCS field office or Conservation District at 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant Materials Program Web site 
http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability of other Web 
sites. 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

