 
 

 

Plant Guide

blister beetle (Epicauta pennsylvanica).  Goldenrod 
and aster species are believed to be the preferred 
floral sources of many oligolectic bees such as 
Andrena hirticincta, A. nubecula, A. placata, A. 
simplex, A. solidaginis, Colletes simulans armatus, 
and Melissoides druriella (Mader et al. 2011).  
Honey bees collect large amounts of nectar from 
goldenrod prior to winter, and other bees use pollen 
from goldenrods to provision late-season nests 
(Mader et al. 2011). 
 
Rangeland revegetation: Canada goldenrod can be 
used for revegetation of disturbed areas, for 
minespoil reclamation, and soil stabilization. 
 
Forage:  This plant is considered to have fair to good 
palatability for cattle, sheep and horses (Dittberner et 
al.1983, as cited by Colandonato 1993).  White-tailed 
deer will selectively forage on Canada goldenrod in 
the late summer and fall (Sauer et al. 1969, as cited 
by Werner et al. 1980). 
 
Ethnobotanical:  The Iroquois made infusions and 
compounds with the flowers and roots of this plant 
and used them as emetics, sedatives, gambling 
medicine and to counteract love potions.  The 
Okanagan-Colville made infusions of the flowers and 
roots to treat diarrhea, fevers, and the flu.  The 
Potowatomi also made infusions of the flowers to 
treat certain fevers, and the Shuswap used the plant in 
baths for women giving birth.  Zunis chewed crushed 
flowers to treat sore throats, and drank infusions of 
the flowers for body pain.  People of the Gosiute tribe 
ate the seeds, and Navajo people ate the roots.  The 
Navajo also smoked the root with other plants and 
used the plant as a charm for success in gambling. 
(Native American Ethnobotany Database 2011). 
 
Ornamental: Canada goldenrod is not typically 
planted in a landscaped setting due to its spreading 
rhizomatous growth.  However, it may be possible to 
manage plants by planting in a pot submersed in the 
ground, or by removing new growth each year.  Seed 
dispersal can be controlled by removing flower heads 
prior to seed ripening. 

Status 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

 
 

CANADA 

GOLDENROD 
Solidago canadensis L. 

Plant Symbol = SOCA6 

 
Contributed by:  NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Pullman, WA 

 

 

Solidago canadensis. www.discoverlife.org 

Alternate Names 
Canadian goldenrod, meadow goldenrod, common 
goldenrod, giant goldenrod, tall goldenrod, shorthair 
goldenrod (S. canadensis var. gilvocanescens), 
Hager’s goldenrod (S. canadensis var. hargeri), 
rough goldenrod (S. canadensis var. salebrosa). 
 
Uses 
Pollinator habitat: Solidago species provide vital 
sources of pollen and nectar for bees and other 
insects in the late summer and fall throughout North 
America (Mader et al. 2011).  Insects known to visit 
Solidago species include beneficial solitary wasps 
and pollen-eating beetles such as the soldier beetle 
(Chauliognathus pennsylvanicus) and the black 

 

Weediness 
Goldenrods have a reputation of being weedy due to 
their aggressive rhizomatous growth, which enables 
them to rapidly colonize disturbed sites and causes 
them to be difficult to control.  However in stable 
rangeland environments, they seldom achieve 
densities that are problematic (Werner et al. 1980; 
Whitson et al. 2004).  Please consult with your local 
NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service 
office, state natural resource, or state agriculture 
department regarding this plant’s status and 
management.   

Description 
General:  Sunflower family (Asteraceae).  Solidago 
canadensis is a native, warm-season, long-lived 
perennial that spreads by rhizomes and forms large, 
dense patches.  Stems are covered with fine hairs at 
the top but are otherwise smooth, and are 30 to 214 
cm (1 to 7 ft) tall.  Leaves are sharply toothed, 
lanceoloate, covered with fine hairs, triple-nerved 
and 5 to 12.5 cm (2 to 5 in) long.  Flower panicles 
occur at the end of each stem, and when open, are 25 
cm (10 in) wide.  Flower heads occur mostly on one 
side of long, drooping panicle branches, are 3 mm 
(0.125 in) tall, and have 10 to 17 short rays.  Flowers 
bloom July through October.  They are self-
incompatible (out-crossing is obligatory) and 
pollination typically occurs by the aid of insects. 
Seeds are achenes with sparse hairs and numerous 
pale bristles at the tip (Hitchcock and Cronquist 
1973;Werner et al. 1980; Knopf 2001; Robert W. 
Freckmann Herbarium 2011).  
 
Solidago canadensis can be distinguished from S. 
missouriensis by its taller stature and larger, more 
branched, open flower panicles.  S. canadensis can be 
distinguished from S. giganteus by hairs on the stems 
and yellow bracts.  
 
The genus name Solidago is from Latin 
solidus/solido (whole) and ago (to make) meaning to 
“make whole or heal”, in reference to the plants’ 
supposed healing properties (Hitchcock and 
Cronquist 1973; Charters 2011). 

Distribution:  This plant is found in all US states 
except HI, LA, AL, GA, SC and FL, and all Canadian 
provinces except Nunavut, St. Pierre and Miquelon.  
The taxon is divided into five varieties:  var. 
canadensis (Canada goldenrod) found in the 
Midwestern and northeastern states and central and 
eastern provinces; var. gilvocanescens (shorthair 
goldenrod) found throughout most states and 
provinces in the species’ range; var. hargeri 
(Harger’s goldenrod) found in the Midwestern, Great 
Plains and southern states in the US and in two 
Canadian provinces; var. lepida (Canada goldenrod) 
found throughout Canada and Alaska; and var. 
salebrosa (rough goldenrod) found primarily 

 

 

throughout Canada, and in the Great Plains and 
western states of the US.  For current distribution of 
this species and varieties, consult the Plant Profile 
page on the PLANTS Web site. 

Solidago canadensis was introduced to Europe in 
1645 and to China in 1930.  Throughout Europe and 
East Asia it is now considered an invasive weed, and  
in some localities it is a threat to biodiversity (Global 
Invasive Species Database, as cited by Discover Life 
2011). 

Solidago canadensis. USDA-NRCS 

 

Habitat: Canada goldenrod typically grows in moist 
soil with medium texture and moderate levels of 
organic matter (Werner et al. 1980; Hitchcock and 
Cronquist 1973).  Sites where it is found include 
damp meadows, waterways, and ditches along 
roadsides and railroads.  The plant may also inhabit 
dry, open slopes in upland prairies, and deciduous 
and evergreen forests.  It is not found on waterlogged 
sites and is only rarely found on very dry sites 
(Werner et al. 1980). 

Solidago canadensis increases during the secondary 
phase of succession, and is a characteristic species of 
abandoned farmland, infrequently grazed pasture, 
waste areas and tall-grass prairies (Werner et al. 
1980).  Werner and Platt (1976) found in a virgin tall-
grass prairie in Dickinson County, Iowa, S. 
canadensis coexisted with more than 300 species of 
herbaceous plants, including 6 other Solidago 
species.   

S. canadensis is long-lived; in many areas it may 
persist for decades, and one stand in Diskinson 
County, Iowa, was thought to be over 100 years old 
(Werner et al. 1980).  Some scientists speculate S. 

canadensis  may have allelopathic properties due to 
the accumulated concentrations of diterpenes within 
the plant (Werner et al. 1980).  Smith (1979, as cited 
by Werner et al. 1980) found water-soluble leachates 
of S. canadensis reduced germination of seeds of 
many annuals, biennials, and perennials, including its 
own. 

Adaptation 
Canada goldenrod is adapted to areas receiving full 
sun or part shade, and 40 to 152 cm (16 to 60 in) of 
annual precipitation.  Plants can grow on all soil 
types and tolerate a wide range of fertility conditions 
(Werner et al. 1980; Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower 
Center 2011).  Plant growth is enhanced by fire of 
low to moderate severity (Coladonato 1993). 

Establishment 
Plants can be established by seed, seedlings, or 
rhizomes.  Seed should be planted into a firm, weed-
free seed bed at a rate of 0.6 kg PLS/ha (0.5 lb 
PLS/ac) and at a depth of 0.3 to 0.6 cm (0.125 to 0.25 
in).  If planted in a mix, the seeding rate should be 
adjusted according to the proportion of the mix.  Seed 
is non-dormant, and can be planted in the fall or 
spring.  Werner et al. (1980) achieved the highest 
levels of germination (75%) with seeds that were 
collected before the first frost and allowed an after-
ripening period of 90 days. 
 
Plants established by seedlings can be started by 
sowing seed in containers placed in a greenhouse in 
January.  Seed should be covered lightly with soil 
and kept moist until germination.  A layer of pea 
gravel can be applied to the soil surface to prevent 
seeds from floating.  Kujawski and Davis (2001) 
determined uniformity and speed of germination 
improved by sowing seed on the surface of moist 
media, covering the trays with plastic to trap moisture 
and placing the trays on heat mats to maintain a 
media temperature of 27 to 30 C (80 to 86 F).  With 
this method, seedlings emerged in 6 to 7 days.   
 
Plants should be moved to a cold-frame in late March 
or early April and hardened off for 2 to 4 weeks prior 
to transplanting into a prepared field site in early 
May.  Plants should be spaced 30 to 60 cm (1 to 2 ft) 
apart. 
 
Plants can also be established by rhizomes.  Sections 
of rhizomes should be collected from cultivated 
plants or approved areas, kept moist during transport, 
and replanted in a prepared field site.   

Management 
This plant spreads by rhizomes and by seed.  Where 
plant spread is not desired, seedlings should be 
planted in a large pot or barrel submersed in the soil, 
or new growth should be cut and removed each year.  
To prevent seed dispersal, flower heads should be 

 

 

removed prior to seed ripening.  Plants will withstand 
vigorous cutting, and will regrow if cut during the 
growing season.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Solidago canadensis is susceptible to the pathogens 
powdery mildew (Erysiphe cichoracearum), root rot 
(Phymatotrichum omnivorum) and needle blister rust 
(Coleosporium solidaginis) (Werner et al. 1980). 
Blister beetles (Epicauta pennsylvanica) pollinate S. 
canadensis flowers (Mader et al. 2011), but consume 
the pollen and stigmas, and can destroy up to 100% 
of the mature disc flowers on an inflorescence branch 
(Gross and Hermanutz, as cited by Werner et al. 
1980).  Several other insects, including soldier 
beetles (Chauliognathus pennsylvanicus), locust 
borers (Megacyllene robinae), and Diabrotica and 
Phyllotreta spp. frequently forage for pollen and 
nectar on S. canadensis but do not appear to consume 
stigmas (Gross and Hermanutz, as cited by Werner et 
al. 1980).  Casebearers (larvae of Coleophora spp.) 
may reduce seed production by feeding on the 
immature ovaries of goldenrod and consuming all 
viable developing achenes on a head (McDunnough 
1956 as cited by Werner et al. 1980).  Three species 
of goldenrod beetle (Trirhabda spp.) feed on 
goldenrod leaves, and the plant may be affected by a 
number of gall-forming insects, mirids and aphids 
(Werner et al. 1980).   
 
Environmental Concerns 
This plant may form dense stands in some habitats, 
particularly where ground is open and disturbed.  To 
prevent dense stands from forming, seed Canada 
goldenrod at low densities or plant in small areas. 
 
Control 
If control of this species is desired, contact your local 
agricultural extension specialist or county weed 
specialist to learn what works best in your area and 
how to use it safely.  Always read label and safety 
instructions for any control method.   

Seeds and Plant Production 
Canada goldenrod plants are indeterminate, and seed 
ripens about 6 weeks after flowers bloom.  Seed is 
wind-disseminated and will blow away when ripe.  
Seed can be harvested with a combine, however the 
most efficient method is with a vacuum, which 
removes only mature seed and minimizes amount of 
undesired plant material.  Small amounts of seed can 
be cleaned by rubbing over a mesh screen and using 
an air column separator to remove the pappus.  
Larger amounts of seed can be threshed with a 
hammer mill and cleaned with air screen equipment.   
 
There are about 4,600,000 seeds per pound (USDA-
NRCS 2011).   
 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
None, however seed and seedlings are available from 
multiple vendors. 

 

References 
Charters, M.L. 2011.  California Plant Names: Latin 
and Greek Meanings and Derivations. [Online] 
Available at: 
http://www.calflora.net/botanicalnames/  
(accessed 3 Mar 2011).  

Coladonato, M. 1993. Solidago canadensis. In: Fire 
Effects Information System. [Online] Available 
at: http:www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/ (Accessed 
3March11). U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research 
Station, Fire Sciences Laboratory. 

Discover Life. [Online] Available at 

http://www.discoverlife.org/20/q (Accessed 
01April11). 

Hitchcock, C.L. and A. Cronquist. 1973. Flora of the 

Pacific Northwest. University of Washington 
Press, Seattle and London. 

Knopf, A. A. 2001. National Audubon Society Field 

Guide to Wildflowers, Western Region. 
Chanticleer Press, New York, NY. 

Kujawski, J., and K.M. Davis. 2001. Propagation 
protocol for production of container Solidago 
canadensis plants; USDA-NRCS Beltsville 
National Plant Materials Center, Beltsville, MD. 
In: Native Plant Network [Online] http:// 
www.nativeplantnetwork.org (Accessed 
3March11). University of Idaho, Moscow, ID. 

Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center. 2011. 

[Online] Available at: 
http://www.wildflower.org/plants/result.php?id_
plant=ERLA6 (Accessed 1April2011). Austin, 
TX. 

Mader, E., M. Shepherd, M. Vaughan, S.H. Black 

and G. LeBuhn. 2011. Attracting Native 
Pollinators. The Xerces Society. Storey 
Publishing, North Adams, MA. 

Native American Ethnobotany Database. 2011. 

[Online] Available at http://herb.umd.umich.edu/ 
(Accessed 01April2011). University of 
Michigan, Dearborn, MI. 

Robert W. Freckmann Herbarium. [Online] Available 

at 
http://wisplants.uwsp.edu/scripts/detail.asp?SpC
ode=SOLCAN (Accessed 01April11). University 
of Wisconsin, Stevens Pt., WI.  

USDA-NRCS. 2011. The PLANTS Database. 

[Online] Available at:http://plants.usda.gov 
(Accessed 01April2011). National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, LA 70874-4490 USA 

Werner, P.A., I.K. Bradbury, and R.S. Gross. 1980. 
The biology of Canadian weeds. 45. Solidago 
canadensis L. Can. J. Plant Sci. 60:1393-1409. 

Werner. P.A. and W.J. Platt. 1976. Ecological 
relationships of co-occurring goldenrolds 
(Solidago: Compositae). Amer. Nat. 110:959-
971. 

Whitson, T., L. Burrill, S. Dewey, D. Cudney, B. 

Nelson, R. Lee, and R. Parker. 2004. Weeds of 
the West. 9th Edition. Western Society of Weed 
Science. University of Wyoming Press, Laramie, 
WY.  

 
Prepared By 
Pamela L.S. Pavek, USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Pullman, Washington 

Citation 
Pavek, P.L.S. 2011. Plant guide for Canada 
goldenrod (Solidago canadensis). USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service. Pullman, WA. 

Published September 2011 
Edited: 11Aug11plsp;01Sept11jab 

For more information about this and other plants, 
please contact your local NRCS field office or 
Conservation District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ 
and visit the PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant Materials Program 
Web site http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or 
availability of other Web sites. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

