 
 

 

Plant Guide

resource, or state agriculture department regarding its 
status and use.  Additional weed information is available 
from the PLANTS Web site at plants.usda.gov.  Consult 
other related web sites on the Plant Profile for this species 
for further information.  
  
Description 
Tansy ragwort is a winter annual, biennial, or short-lived 
perennial commonly growing between 8-36 inches (20-80 
centimeters) tall, but sometimes to heights greater than 6 
feet (175-200 centimeters) under optimal conditions.  
Rigid stems grow singly or in groups from an upright 
caudex with only the upper half of the stems branching at 
the inflorescence.  Tansy ragwort additionally perennates 
via fragments of the numerous (50-100/crown) soft, 
fleshy roots that grow primarily horizontally and 
penetrate the soil to a maximum depth of 12 inches (30 
centimeters).  
    
Rosettes, either seedling or root bud in origin, are formed 
from distinctive stalked basal leaves  2.7-7.9 inches (7-20 
centimeters) long, deeply and pinnately lobed with ovate, 
obovate, or narrow coarsely-toothed segments.  Leaves 
are either glabrous or with loose wooly down on the 
underside, especially during early development.  Rosette 
leaves generally die back at or before flowering.  Stem 
leaves are deeply bi- or tri-pinnatifid, arranged alternately 
on the stem and are reduced in size higher on the stem.  
Middle and upper stem leaves lack a petiole and slightly 
clasp the stem.  
    
Bright yellow, showy flowers arise only on the pedicel 
ends; outer pedicels are progressively longer than inner 
pedicels and form flat- or round-topped, dense and 
compact corymbs.  Capitula 12-25 millimeters in diameter 
and numbering 20-60 per corymb have 13 dark-tipped 
bracts 3-4 millimeters long, and are composed of both ray 
and disc florets.  There are 13 achene producing ray 
florets with rays 8-2 millimeters long.  Disc florets are 
numerous and produce both pollen and achenes.  The 
number of capitula and achenes produced per plant is 
highly variable. 
 
Single seeds are contained within each achene; achenes 
produced from ray florets shed their pappus, are glabrous, 
and have a thick pericarp, whereas achenes produced 
from disc florets retain their pappus, are pubescent with 
short hairs (trichomes) along prominent ribs and are 
lighter in weight than ray achenes.  The pappus, 
composed of numerous white 'hairs' 6 millimeters in 
length, is attached to the top of the achene; its 
resemblance to a white beard explains the origin of the 
genus name, Senecio, derived from the Latin senex for 
"old" or "old man".   

TANSY RAGWORT 

 
Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Montana State Office 

Senecio jacobaea L.  

Plant Symbol = SEJA 

 

Tansy ragwort flowers.  Photo by Michael Shephard,  USDA Forest 
Service, available from Bugwood.org  
 
Caution:  This plant may be weedy or invasive.   
 
Alternate Names 
staggerwort, stinking willie.    
 
Uses 
Tansy ragwort exceeds the 1975 U.S. National Research 
Council protein and digestibility requirements for sheep 
for which it has been suggested as good summer feed.  It 
is a good bio-monitor of iron, manganese and zinc in 
atmospheric pollutants.   
 
Status 
Tansy ragwort is a non-native, invasive terrestrial forb 
listed as noxious, prohibited, or banned in nine states.    
 
Weediness 
This plant may be weedy or invasive in some regions or 
habitats and may displace desirable vegetation if not 
properly managed.  Consult with your local NRCS Field 
Office, Cooperative Extension Service office, state natural 

 

Tansy ragwort can be distinguished from native Senecio 
species by its comparatively larger size and exaggerated 
pattern of leaf dissection.  Although tansy ragwort 
superficially resembles common tansy (Tanacetum 
vulgare), it differs significantly in flower composition, 
producing capitula with both ray and disc florets whereas 
common tansy flowers are composed solely of disc 
florets.   
 
Distribution 
For current distribution, consult the Plant Profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site.   
 
Habitat 
Tansy ragwort tolerates a wide range of habitats and 
environmental conditions but is generally found on mesic 
sites with commonly cool, wet, cloudy weather.  It grows 
on many soil types but usually on lighter, well-drained 
loamy to sandy soils.  It normally does not grow where 
there is a high water table or on highly acidic soils.  In 
Europe it naturally occurs in sand dune, woodland, and 
grassland communities.  In North America it is found in 
pastures, forest clearings, and waste places and is often 
associated with Canada thistle (Cirsium arvense), 
common St. Johnswort (Hypericum perforatum) and 
yellow toadflax (Linaria vulgaris).   
 
Life History 
Tansy ragwort is typically a biennial plant: it reproduces 
for the most part by seed; it overwinters in the seed or 
rosette stage; and it passes through the first growing 
season in the vegetative rosette stage before becoming 
reproductively mature.  However, because both the root 
and the caudex of this species have the capacity to form 
perennating buds under environmental or mechanical 
stress, tansy ragwort has the vegetative regenerative 
capacity of a perennial.  A study of 179 plants in Australia 
found 2% were annuals, 45% biennials, and 39% were 
perennials.  A separate study in England found 8% of the 
plants were annuals, 39% were biennials, and 53% were 
perennials.  Tansy ragwort has been observed as a true 
perennial by continuing to grow after flowering, 
particularly after disturbance.  An Oregon study reported 
20% of the tansy ragwort plants in a population were true 
perennials.   
 
Tansy ragwort has four distinct life history stages: seeds, 
seedlings, rosettes, and flowering plants.  The viability of 
a tansy ragwort seed crop is about 80%.  The seeds have 
no mechanisms of innate dormancy other than the 
relatively thick pericarp on ray floret achenes which is 
believed to delay germination by a  
few days.  The maximum potential for germination is 
reached when achenes leave the flowerhead: however, 
experimentation showed this potential did not 
significantly decrease after three years of storage under 
field conditions.  Most seed germinates in the late summer 
or early autumn, but seeds lying dormant throughout the 
winter will germinate at the beginning of the growing 

 

 

season in the spring.  Ideal temperatures for germination 
range between 41-86o F (5-30o C).  Soil moisture 
influences germination: at any given temperature an 
increase in soil moisture increases germination and the 
optimum temperature for germination changes as soil 
moisture changes.  Vegetative cover may inhibit 
germination and frost, drought, or burial may induce 
dormancy.  Seed buried in soil deeper than 0.75 inch (2 
centimeters) remain dormant.  Light is required for 
germination.  Studies showed 24% of seeds buried for six 
years maintained their viability.  Also, seeds buried up to 
2 centimeters deep had a higher germination rate than 
seeds left on the soil surface, most likely because 
moisture is consistently greater below the soil surface 
than on the surface.  Seeds subjected to drought or cold 
temperature shock had delayed germination; the longer 
the shock, the longer the delay.  
  
Seedling establishment and survival are variable, the 
largest determinant of survival being the amount of 
vegetative cover.  In experimental garden plots two 
months after seeding tansy ragwort, no seedlings survived 
in plots with long grass or in plots with short but 
continuous turf, whereas seedling survival was greater in 
cleared or forest land areas than grassy areas.  Grazed 
pastures on Prince Edward Island, Canada, had about 
eight times more tansy ragwort plants than non-grazed 
pastures.  
    
Once established, seedlings form flattened rosettes that 
are effective competitors.  The large rosette leaves are 
able to cover neighboring plants thereby suppressing their 
growth.  When the rosette leaves die, sites are opened for 
tansy ragwort seed germination.  One study found 
seedling establishment was over four times higher on sites 
opened by dying rosettes than on sites in surrounding 
vegetation.  Alkaloids produced by rosettes may have the 
allelopathic effect of suppressing other plants.  Rosette 
leaves die when plants flower.  
  
Plants typically flower during the second year of growth.  
Flowering has been reported to begin as early as June and 
to last as late as mid-November.  It is believed rosettes 
must achieve some minimum size before flowering can 
begin, and the probability of flowering increases as 
rosette size increases.  Floral expansion is rapid and 
florets are receptive to pollination as soon as the floret is 
fully expanded.  Hymenopteran (bee/wasp) and dipteran 
(fly) insect species are the primary pollinators of tansy 
ragwort. Seed disperses throughout the fall. Rosettes that 
do not flower continue to grow into the fall accumulating 
storage carbohydrate important for winter survival. 
Carbohydrate content of the plant is highest going into 
winter.  
 
Establishment 
Tansy ragwort establishes from seed and root fragments.  
 
 

 

Management 
See Control 
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
See Environmental Concerns.  
 
Environmental Concerns 
Tansy ragwort can reduce forage yields by as much as 
50% in pastures. Pyrrolizidine alkaloids are present in all 
plant parts. Cattle, deer, horses and goats consuming 
either growing plants or tansy ragwort in silage and hay 
store these alkaloids in their liver. Even if symptoms are 
not evident or are minor in nature, the cumulative storage 
of alkaloids can result in reduced weight gain, liver 
degradation, reduced butterfat content of milk, and 
sudden death in apparently healthy animals. Alkaloids in 
tansy ragwort pollen also taint honey, making it bitter, 
off-color and unmarketable.  
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Not applicable.  
 
Control 
Contact your local agricultural extension specialist or 
county weed specialist to learn what works best for 
control in your area and how to use it safely. Always read 
label and safety instructions for each control method. 
Trade names and control measures appear in this 
document only to provide specific information. USDA 
NRCS does not guarantee or warranty the products and 
control methods named, and other products may be 
equally effective.  
 
Tansy ragwort can be controlled using auxinic herbicides 
(mimics of auxin, a naturally-occurring plant growth 
regulator). The best timing of application is when tansy 
ragwort is actively growing in the rosette stage either in 
the spring or mid-fall. Herbicides are less effective after 
plants have bolted to produce flowers. In most cases 
reapplication of herbicide or integration with other control 
methods will be required for sustained population 
reductions. The amine, low-volatile ester, or emulsifiable 
acid formulations of 2,4-D are effective when applied at 
two pounds acid equivalent per acre. Always check the 
herbicide label to confirm formulation and proper  
use of the product before applying. When using four 
pounds acid equivalent per gallon formulation, apply the 
mixed product at a rate of two quarts per acre.  
 
Tansy ragwort is listed on the following herbicide labels 
at rates in parentheses: picloram (1-2 qt./ac.), 
aminopyralid (5-7 oz./ac.), metsulfuron (0.5-1 oz./ac. with 
nonionic surfactant at 0.5%), and chlorsulfuron (1-3 
oz./ac. with nonionic surfactant at 0.5% volume to 
volume). Metsulfuron and chlorsulfuron should not be 
applied where soil pH is greater than 7.9 because under 
these conditions chemical breakdown is slow resulting in 
extended residual activity that increases the risk of off-site 
movement of the chemical and non-target plant injury. 

 

 

Consult individual herbicide labels for other possible soil 
pH restrictions.  
 
Herbicides are most effective where competitive desired 
plants are present to fill voids in the plant community 
following successful tansy ragwort control. However, 
herbicide injury to non-target desirable broadleaved plants 
and some grasses should be expected; consult product 
labels for further information on potential non-target 
injury. To avoid non-target injury, apply herbicides in the 
fall after desired plants are dormant for the winter. This 
tactic is most effective when using herbicides with low 
residual activity. Always follow label instructions to 
reduce toxicity or other unintended risks to humans and 
the environment, and to confirm potential grazing and 
replanting restrictions. Herbicide treatments typically 
increase the concentration of water-soluble carbohydrate 
in tansy ragwort, making it more palatable to livestock 
and thereby increasing the risk of alkaloid poisoning. 
Grazing should therefore be deferred for 3-4 weeks after 
herbicide application.  
 
Hand pulling and digging that extracts all of the caudex 
and fleshy rootstock is an effective method to temporally 
reduce tansy ragwort on small-scale infestations and 
scattered plants either as new invaders or those persisting 
after herbicide treatments. Pulling rosette and flowering 
plants will reduce seed set. Follow-up management will 
be needed to eliminate plants regenerating from root 
fragments or seed. Protective gloves are recommended to 
be worn as a precautionary measure by anyone handling 
tansy ragwort.  
 
Mowing is not an effective control for tansy ragwort. 
Rosettes are flat to the ground and may be missed by the 
mower blade, and when clipped, vegetative reproduction 
is stimulated. Mowing when plants bolt to flower may 
temporarily reduce seed production; however, plants will 
survive to flower again. A dispersal study found achenes 
dispersed as much as two and a half times farther on 
mowed sites than where the natural vegetation remained. 
However, in Switzerland, frequent mowing promoted 
fast-growing grass species and was associated with 
reduced occurrence of tansy ragwort. Mowing to maintain 
vigorous grassland communities may help prevent tansy 
ragwort invasion.  
 
The roots and caudex of tansy ragwort have the ability to 
regenerate after they are broken by tilling. Therefore, 
tillage has the potential to spread tansy ragwort and is not 
recommended by itself. The disturbance of tillage can 
create a favorable environment for tansy ragwort growth 
and reproduction by reducing competitive perennial 
plants. Tillage should be combined with herbicide 
management and followed by revegetation with desired, 
competitive plants.  
Tansy ragwort thrives under mesic conditions and 
therefore irrigation is not recommended as a control by 
itself. Where tansy ragwort invades irrigated pastures and 

hayland, carefully planned irrigation management will 
stimulate the competitiveness of the forage crop and when 
combined with nutrient, forage harvest, and grazing 
management practices and will help prevent the re-
establishment of tansy ragwort after other control 
practices are applied.  
 
Tansy ragwort is found on pastures of low to moderate 
nutrient status in Switzerland, which is part of its native 
range. A Swiss study found the amount of plant-available 
nitrogen was one of the most important factors predicting 
the occurrence of tansy ragwort. The model developed 
from that study predicted a fivefold reduction in the risk 
of tansy ragwort occurrence by doubling the application 
of nitrogen from about 50 lb./ac. to 100 lb./ac. On 
cultivated pasture and hay meadows, nutrient 
management is important to maintaining the 
competitiveness of desired perennial grasses. Nutrient 
management combined with judicious use of herbicides 
and crop rotation is recommended where tansy ragwort 
invades non-native pastures and hay meadows.  
 
Fire is reportedly effective in killing reproductive tansy 
ragwort plants and achenes. Fire is also sometimes used to 
maintain the vigor and density of grassland communities 
by burning excess plant litter and possibly increasing soil 
fertility. Fire can therefore be used as a preventative 
measure or in combination with other control methods to 
reduce tansy ragwort populations. On forested sites and  
clearings, the disturbance caused by fire may create 
openings favorable to tansy ragwort invasion.  
 
The way grazing is managed is an important factor 
influencing localized presence and distribution of tansy 
ragwort in its native range. In a Swiss study continuously 
grazed pasture was 11 times more likely to be infested by 
tansy ragwort than pasture managed under rotational 
grazing because the former management regime resulted 
in more openings in the grass canopy where tansy ragwort 
could establish. Pasture with greater than 25% uncovered 
soil had a 40-fold greater risk of tansy ragwort occurrence 
than pasture with less than 25% bare ground. Prescribed 
grazing that maintains a continuous grassland community 
is recommended both for the prevention of tansy ragwort 
invasion and in pastures where it is already being 
controlled.  
 
Tansy ragwort leaves and flowers exceed the standard 
protein and digestibility requirements for sheep. In 
addition, sheep seem to be immune to the plant’s toxic 
alkaloids, and are willing grazers of young plants. In New 
Zealand, intensive sheep grazing is the predominant 
management approach for tansy ragwort; the weed 
generally does not occur where sheep are regularly 
stocked. In an Oregon grazing study, tansy ragwort seed 
production was prevented and plant mortality was 
attributed to sheep grazing in the summer following cattle 
grazing in the spring. A separate study found tansy 
ragwort plants subjected to 75% defoliation were able to 

 

 

compensate fully five months after treatment when grown 
without competition. When grown in competition with 
Richardson’s fescue (Festuca rubra), there was no re-
growth after 75% defoliation. These studies suggest sheep 
grazing is effective in controlling tansy ragwort where it 
grows in a competitive grassland community.  
 
Biological control of tansy ragwort in the U.S. was 
initiated in 1959 with the California release of the 
cinnabar moth, Tyria jacobaeae L. (Lepidoptera: 
Arctiidae). This agent is now well-established in 
California, Oregon, Washington, northern Idaho and 
northwestern Montana. The cinnabar moth flourishes in 
lower elevation (below 3,000 feet/900 meters) open 
canopy areas with warm, sunny summers and large, high-
density infestations of tansy ragwort. Adult moths are 
0.60-0.88 inch (15-22 millimeters) long with a wingspan 
of 1.08-1.40 inches (27-35 millimeters) and have a 
distinctive appearance: the black forewing is marked by a 
few irregularly-shaped crimson spots and a crimson line 
along the outer edge of the wing while the hind wing is 
entirely crimson. 
 

 

Cinnabar moth.  Image: Eric Coombs, Oregon Department of 
Agriculture.  Available at Bugwood.org  
 
Cinnabar moths typically emerge by late spring, mate and 
finish depositing eggs by mid-summer. Moths can be 
roused into flight during daylight hours when host 
vegetation is disturbed. Eggs are laid on the underside of 
rosette leaves in small groups. The eggs hatch after 
several weeks’ development and emerging larvae begin 
feeding on foliage closest to the hatch site. The damaging 
larval stage of this agent is easily recognized by its 
alternating bands of bright orange and black. Pupation 
begins in late summer when the fully-grown fifth-instar 
larvae seek out suitable sites in debris or soil, or under 
bark; the cinnabar moth overwinters as a 0.80-1.00 inch 
(20-25 millimeters) long dark reddish-brown pupa.  
 

Roving groups (10-30 individuals) of the gregarious 
larval stage of this agent aggressively feed on the leaves, 
flowers and apical meristems of bolting tansy ragwort, 
leaving plants stripped of all foliage. Larval feeding can 
lead to significant reductions in seed production and stand 
density, although impact varies considerably. The larval 
stage of this agent is optimal for redistribution onto 
uncolonized populations of tansy ragwort. Caterpillars are 
easily collected by shaking plants over collecting pans 
(such as kitty litter trays); retain larvae under cool, dry 
and uncrowded conditions in ventilated (with pin holes) 
containers provisioned with fresh host plant material for 
as short a period as possible before releasing. Because 
endogenous toxic alkaloids sequestered from tansy 
ragwort are present in both the larval and adult stage of 
this agent, implications for livestock health and 
management should be considered when choosing sites 
for releasing the cinnabar moth. 
 

 

Larval stage of cinnabar moth.  Image: Eric Coombs, Oregon 
Department of Agriculture.  Available at Bugwood.org  
 
The efficacy of the cinnabar moth alone in controlling 
tansy ragwort is limited with successful control reported 
only when larval defoliation was accompanied by 
favorable environmental factors (frost).  Although this 
agent is highly effective in combination with the ragwort 
flea beetle, its deployment has been surrounded by 
controversy.  Non-target attack on the exotic weed 
common groundsel Senecio vulgaris, two native species 
Senecio triangularis and Packera pseudaurea (formerly 
Senecio pseudaureus) and the ornamental silver ragwort, 
Senecio bicolor, have been reported when moth 
population densities outstrip local tansy ragwort 
resources.  
  
The ragwort seed fly Botanophila seneciella Meade 
(Diptera: Anthomyiidae) was first introduced in 
California in 1966 and was the first tansy ragwort agent to 
become well-established east of the Cascades.  

 

 

Botanophila seneciella was released to additively improve 
tansy ragwort biocontrol by bolstering the low levels of 
control realized with the cinnabar moth.  Adult flies, 0.20-
0.28 inch (5-7 millimeters) in length, emerge in spring 
and deposit eggs on tansy ragwort flower buds through 
early summer.  The 0.16-0.24 inch (4-6 millimeters) long 
creamy-white larva tunnels into the flowerhead and 
throughout the receptacle, eventually moving back up to 
the seed head.  Evidence of infestation by this agent is 
obvious: larval feeding generally destroys all seed within 
mined seed heads, and flowers under attack are typically 
marked by frothy spittle.   

 

Ragwort seed fly - adult.  Image: Eric Coombs, Oregon Department of 
Agriculture.   Available at Bugwood.org  
 
Mature larvae exit host seed heads in late summer to 
pupate in the soil.  The ragwort seed fly overwinters as a 
dark brown 0.2 inch (5 millimeters) long pupa.  Because 
this agent shares the same habitat preferences as the 
cinnabar moth, their joint release is often marked by 
resource competition for favorably located host plants.  
The seed fly usually loses out because the moth’s 
phenology allows it to begin ovi-positing earlier so that 
caterpillars have generally stripped all flowerheads from 
plants in open canopy areas by the time the seed fly is 
ready to begin ovi-position.  Reproductive success is 
significantly reduced when resource competition forces 
the fly to lay eggs on host plants located in moist, shaded 
areas.  This agent has self-distributed comprehensively 
throughout the Pacific Northwest; redistribution is 
generally unnecessary but if desired is best accomplished 
by transplanting fly-infested plants in late spring.  The 
light gold-colored ragwort flea beetle, Longitarsus 
jacobaeae Waterhouse (Coleoptera: Chrysomelidae), first 
introduced to the U.S. in 1969, is now established in 
Montana, Idaho, Washington, Oregon, and California.  
Intensive foliar feeding by adult flea beetles, termed "shot 
holing," is a clear indicator of whether or not a tansy 
ragwort stand has been colonized by this agent.  Ragwort 
flea beetles introduced to the U.S. before 2002 were 

collected in Italy; the so-called Italian strain of this agent 
is credited with exceptional control and continued 
suppression of tansy ragwort infestations west of the 
Cascades.  A Swiss strain of this agent with a completely 
different phenology than the Italian strain and believed to 
be better adapted to higher elevations, colder winters and 
shorter growing seasons typical of tansy ragwort infested 
areas east of the Cascades was released in Montana in 
2002. 
 
Adult Italian-strain ragwort flea beetles emerge briefly in 
spring before returning to the soil to estivate (summer 
dormancy) until prompted by late summer/early fall rains 
to begin mating.  Eggs laid from October through 
November produce slender white larvae 0.08-0.16 inch 
(2-4 millimeters) in length that feed throughout the winter 
on the host plant roots.  Larvae leave the roots in the 
spring to pupate in the soil.  Pupae are white and 0.08-
0.16 inch (2-4 millimeters) long.  
  
Swiss-strain adult flea beetles emerge from their pupation 
sites in the soil in late spring to early summer and begin 
feeding, mating and laying eggs immediately.  
Development in the eggs of Swiss-strain beetles is 
delayed through the rest of that summer, fall and winter 
and does not begin until the following spring.  Larvae 
feed on and in tansy ragwort roots until pupating in the 
fall.  The Swiss strain of the ragwort flea beetle is unique 
in that it overwinters both in the egg and pupal stage.  
Adults of both strains are 0.08-0.16 inch (2-4 millimeters) 
in length with the males approximately 0.04 inch (1 
millimeter) shorter than the females.  
  
Tansy ragwort rosettes appears to be the most susceptible 
stage of this weed as significant control is realized from 
both larval root mining and adult foliar feeding that 
specifically targets vegetative (non-reproductive) plants.  
The adult flea of the beetle is best suited to successful 
collection for redistribution, either by vacuum collection 
or sweeping, October-November for the Italian strain and 
mid-summer for the Swiss strain.  
  
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin):  Not applicable.  
  
References:  
Bain, J.F.  1991.  The biology of Canadian weeds.  96.  
 
 
Coombs, E.M., J.K. Clark, G.L. Piper and A.F. 
 
 
 
Coombs, E.M., H. Radtde, D.L. Isaacson and S.P. Snyder.  
 
 
 

Cofrancesco, Jr. (Eds).  2004.  Biological Control of 
Invasive Plants in the United States.  Corvallis, OR: 
Oregon State University Press.  467 pp. 

1997.  Economic and regional benefits from the 
biological control of tansy ragwort, Senecio 
jacobaea, in Oregon.  Proceedings of the IX 

Senecio jacobaea L.  Canadian Journal of Plant 
Science 71: 127-140.  

 

 

 

University of Cape Town.  

Ecology 45: 617-637.  

ragwort.  Weed Technology 9: 402-404.  

International Symposium on Biological Control of 

distances in dimorphic achenes of ragwort, Senecio 
jacobaea.  Ecology 68(6): 2006-2015.  

biological control agent for tansy ragwort.  Journal of 
Range Management 34(4): 440-482.  

 
  Weeds, pp. 489-494.  V.C. Moran and J.H. Hoffmann 
 
Crawley, M.J. and R. Pattrasudhi.  1988.  Interspecific 
competition between insect herbivores: asymmetric 
 
competition between cinnabar moth and the ragwort 
 
 
seed-head fly.  Ecological Entomology 13: 243-249.  
Harper, J.L. and W.A. Wood.  1957.  Senecio jacobaea L. 
 
McEvoy, P.B. and C. S. Cox.  1987.  Wind dispersal 
 
 
Mitich, L.W.  1995.  Intriguing world of weeds - tansy 
 
Sharrow, S.H. and W.D. Mosher.  1980.  Sheep as a 
 
 
Suter, M., S. Siegrist-Maag, J. Connolly, and A. Lüscher.  
 
 
 
del-Val, E. and M.J. Crawley.  2004.  Interspecific 
competition and tolerance to defoliation in four 
 
 
grassland species.  Canadian Journal of Botany 82: 
 
871-877.  
  
Prepared By:  
  
James S. Jacobs, Plant Materials Specialist 
Montana/Wyoming, USDA NRCS, Bozeman, Montana   
  
Sharlene Sing, Research Entomologist – USDA FS Rocky 
Mountain Research Station, Bozeman, Montana  
  
Species Coordinator:  
James S. Jacobs, Plant Materials Specialist 
Montana/Wyoming, Bozeman, Montana   

2007.  Can the occurrence of Senicio jacobaea be 
influenced by management practice?  Weed Research 
47: 262-269.  

Citation 
Jacobs, J. 2009. Plant Guide for tansy ragwort (Senecio 
jacobaea L). USDA-Natural Resources Conservation 
Service, State Office, Bozeman, MT  59715 

Published  July, 2009 

Edited: 05June09JSJ; 08june09dgo;   

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

