 
 

 

Plant Guide

status (e.g. threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status and wetland indicator values). 
 
Description 
General: Streambed bristlegrass is a native, warm season, 
perennial bunchgrass which turns a pale whitish color at 
maturity.  It has stiffly erect stems and can grow up to 
three feet in height. Leaf blades are flat, 3 to 10 inches 
long and typically less than ¼ inch wide.  Sheaths have 
long hairs along the upper margins.  Plants produce a 
densely flowered, contracted seedhead that is generally 2-
4 inches long and only about a ¼ inch thick.  The bristles, 
by which it gets its common name, are 4 to 15 mm long 
and are usually solitary below each spikelet.  Spikelets are 
from 2.1-2.7 millimeters (Gould, 1975). 
 
Distribution:  For current distribution, please consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site.  It is found mainly in Texas, New Mexico and 
Arizona.  It also can be encountered in Colorado, 
Oklahoma, Arkansas and Florida.  
 
Habitat:   Streambed bristlegrass is generally found in the 
dry rangelands of Texas to Arizona with annual rainfall of 
10 to 26 inches.  In the west it occurs at elevations of 
3,000 to 7,000 feet (Gay and Dwyer, 1980).  It is located 
on bottomlands and alluvial flats as well as well-drained, 
dry, open sites.  However, it predominates on loamy 
bottomland, clay flat, and saline clay range sites.  It is 
associated with false Rhodes grass, pink pappusgrass, and 
Arizona cottontop. 
 
Adaptation 
Streambed bristlegrass is found on open dry ground, in 
dry woods, and on well drained, sandy loam soils.  In 
Texas it most often is found on clay to clay loam soils. 
 
Establishment 
Seedbed preparation should begin well in advance of 
planting.  Planting can be scheduled for early spring or 
where there are few cool-season weeds, streambed 
bristlegrass can be planted in the fall.  In Arizona and 
New Mexico planting should be timed to catch the 
summer monsoons.  Establish a clean, weed-free seedbed 
by either tillage or herbicides.  Prior to planting, the site 
should be firm and have accumulated soil moisture.   
 
Streambed bristlegrass is best seeded using a grass drill to 
ensure a good planting of the small seed.  Broadcast 
seeding may be used in areas not easily planted with a 
drill, but some type of additional coverage such as culti-
packing or light dragging will be beneficial to ensure 
good seed to soil contact.   
 

STREAMBED 
BRISTLEGRASS 

Setaria leucopila  

 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS, E. “Kika” de la Garza 
Plant Materials Center 

(Scribn. & Merr.) K. Schum. 

Plant Symbol = SELE6 

Shelly D. Maher, USDA NRCS 

 

Alternate Names 
Setaria macrostachya  Kunth in H.B.K. 
 
Setaria vulpiseta (plains bristlegrass), Setaria texana 
(Texas bristlegrass) and Setaria leucopila are all 
sometimes included under the common name of plains 
bristlegrass.  It is suspected that all three species, along 
with S. scheelei, may hybridize.  (When ordering 
bristlegrass seed, it should be realized that the seed may 
belong to any of these three species.  Much of the seed 
industry still uses the common name plains bristlegrass to 
include Setaria macrostachya, S. vulpiseta, S. leucopila, 
and S. texana.  However, there are notable ecological and 
morphological differences between the three species 
which may affect the suitability of the plants for a specific 
site or project). 
 
Uses 
Streambed bristlegrass provides fair to good forage for 
livestock and wildlife.  It is a good seed producer, and its 
seeds can provide a source of food for upland-bird 
habitats (Hatch, Schuster and Drawe, 1999).  It is also 
useful for highway right-of-ways and ecosystem 
restoration. 
 
Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 

 

Seed should be planted 1/8 to 1/4 inch deep.  It is better to 
plant too shallow than too deep.  For calibration purposes, 
Kika819 Germplasm streambed bristlegrass contains 
approximately 370,000 seeds per bulk pound.  A seeding 
rate of 2 pound of pure live seed (PLS) per acre is 
recommended.  In planting mixtures reduce the rate 
according to the percent of streambed bristlegrass in the 
mixture.  
 
Soil analysis should be performed prior to planting to 
determine the necessary levels of nitrogen, phosphorus 
and potassium.  Nitrogen should not be applied until the 
stand is established.  If one plant per square foot has 
become established than the planting has been successful. 
 
Management 
Streambed bristlegrass should not be grazed the first year.  
After a stand is established, either continuous or rotational 
grazing can be used. Contact your local NRCS field office 
for assistance in developing a prescribed grazing plan. 
 
Plants should be allowed to produce seed occasionally to 
insure stand health.  Streambed bristlegrass is a long-lived 
perennial that is extremely drought and fire tolerant once 
established.   
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Control of pests may be necessary in order to produce 
seed crops in dry years under irrigation. 
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Seed increase plots have been planted on 36” bedded 
rows, however flat plantings may be possible with 
frequent weeding. Streambed bristlegrass can also be 
established with vegetative transplants.  This is an 
especially effective method when dealing with a highly 
dormant accession of streambed bristlegrass.   Rapid 
growth of transplants can be expected providing seed 
harvests within the first year.  Furthermore transplants 
stands facilitate better weed control in the seed production 
fields.  Deep soil tillage or frequent close cultivation is 
recommended to promote seed production. Commercial 
herbicides are available for weed control once plants are 
beyond the seedling growth stage.  Consult your local 
extension weed specialist for recommended herbicides. 
 
Streambed bristlegrass produces seed throughout the year.  
Seed is harvested with a combine.   The use of slow travel 
and RPM speeds (<5mph) while harvesting results in 
relatively clean seed, needing little cleaning or 
processing. A clipper seed cleaner is used to clean stems 
and chaff.  
 
Seed fields have ranged in yields from 100 to 500 bulk 
pounds of clean seed.  Purity of the seed is usually around 
90%.  However, this species tends to have a very high 
dormancy factor ranging from 90-99%.  Therefore, 28 day 
germination rates can vary from 40 to 1%.  Adequately 

 

 

stored seed in humidity and temperature controlled 
facilities can be expected to stay viable for over 10 years. 
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
Catarina blend bristlegrass is a commercial blend of four 
bristlegrass collections from south Texas.  One 
component is a plains bristlegrass (Setaria vulpiseta ) 
collected in Webb County, Texas. The other three 
components are streambed bristlegrass (Setaria leucopila) 
collected in Karnes, Bexar and Willacy Counties.  
Catarina blend bristlegrass was released by the E. “Kika” 
de la Garza Plant Materials Center in 2006. This 
collection was chosen because of its excellent 
germination rates of 40% along with its long-term seed 
dormancy for droughty conditions.  It is adaptable to a 
wide range of soil types. It also produces an abundance of 
seed for upland game birds and a fair amount of forage 
for livestock and wildlife.  Breeder seed is maintained by 
USDA-NRCS E.”Kika” de la Garza Plant Materials 
Center, Kingsville, Texas in conjunction with Texas 
Foundation Seed Service. 
 
‘Stevan’  plains bristlegrass (Setaria leucopila) was 
released in 1994 by the USDA-NRCS (formerly the Soil 
Conservation Service (SCS)) and the University of 
Arizona Agricultural Experiment Station for use in 
Arizona, New Mexico and western Texas. ‘Stevan’  
bristlegrass is a population of 13 accessions that were 
selected by the Tucson Plant Materials Center.  ‘Stevan’ 
exhibited significantly higher seedling emergence than 
commercially available populations of other 
bristlegrasses.  It was selected primarily for use in 
revegetation of eroded rangelands, retired croplands, 
critical areas and to provide forage for wildlife and 
livestock. Breeder seed is maintained by USDA-NRCS 
Tucson Plant Materials Center, Tucson, Arizona. 
 
References 
Gay, Jr., C.W. and D.D. Dwyer.  1980. New Mexico 

Range Plants. New Mexico State University 
Cooperative Extension Service Circular 374.  Las 
Cruces, NM.  

Gould, F.W. 1975. The Grasses of Texas.  Texas A&M 

University Press. College Station, TX. 

Hatch, S. L. , J.L. Schuster and D. L. Drawe.  1999. 

Grasses of the Texas Gulf Prairies and Marshes.   
Texas A&M University Press.  College Station, TX.  

 
Prepared By 
John Lloyd-Reilley, Manager 
USDA-NRCS E. “Kika” de la Garza Plant Materials 
Center, Kingsville, Texas 
 
Citation 
Lloyd-Reilley, J.  2010.  Plant guide for streambed 
bristlegrass  (Setaria leucopila). USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, E. “Kika” de la Garza 
Plant Materials Center.  Kingsville, TX.   

 

Published October, 2010 
 
Edited: [15Sep2010 sdm] 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

