 
 

 

Plant Guide

 
Grain: Cereal rye is grown as a grain crop for alcoholic 
beverages, food, livestock feed, and seed (Oelke et al., 
1990). Rye flour can be used alone to make leavened 
bread, but it is more commonly mixed with wheat flour 
(Bushuk, 2001).   
 
Annual Pasture: Cereal rye can be grazed during the late 
fall or early spring when other forages are not available 
(Oelke et al., 1990).  When used as grazed forage, cereal 
rye is usually mixed with other cool season species such 
as triticale. 
 
Hay: Cereal rye can be cut for hay when it is in the early 
heading stage of development (Oelke et al., 1990).  It 
provides the best hay forage when it is grown with other 
species such as red or crimson clover, or annual ryegrass 
(Oelke et al., 1990). If used for forage production, cereal 
rye can contain up to 9% crude protein (Watson et al., 
1993).    

Status 
Cereal rye is considered a Class C noxious weed in 
Washington.  Please consult the PLANTS Web site and 
your State Department of Natural Resources for this 
plant’s current status (e.g., threatened or endangered 
species, state noxious status, and wetland indicator 
values).  

Weediness 
Cereal rye has the potential to become a weed if it is 
allowed to produce mature seed (Clark, 2007).  It can be 
killed with herbicides, mowing, chopping, or roller 
crimping at the correct growth stage (Clark, 2007; Oelke 
et al., 1990). Please consult with your local NRCS Field 
Office, Cooperative Extension Service office, state natural 
resource, or state agriculture department regarding its 
status and use. Weed information is also available from 
the PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/.  Please 
consult the Related Web Sites on the Plant Profile for this 
species for further information. 

Ethnobotany 
English and Dutch settlers brought cereal rye to the 
northeastern United States. Flour made from cereal rye is 
gluten free (Oelke et al., 1990), which makes it an ideal 
flour for people with celiac disease. It has been 
historically grown in the North Central states of South 
Dakota, Nebraska, North Dakota, and Minnesota (Oelke 
et al., 1990). 
The witch hunts and executions that have occurred 
throughout history may have been the result of a 
misdiagnosis of rye ergot poisoning (Matossian, 1989). 
Many of the symptoms of ergot poisoning, such as 

CEREAL RYE 
Secale cereale L. 
Plant Symbol = SECE 

Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Elsberry Plant Materials 
Center, Missouri 

 

Flowering cereal rye in a cover crop experimental plot in April at 
Elsberry, Missouri. 

Alternate Names 
Alternate Common Names:  common rye, rye, winter rye, 
grain rye, cultivated rye 
Alternate Scientific Names:  Secale montanum, Secale 
strictum, Triticum cereale 

Uses 
Cover crop and green manure: Cereal rye is often planted 
in the fall for soil erosion control (Oelke et al., 1990). As 
a cover crop, cereal rye can scavenge nitrogen, build soil, 
loosen topsoil (reduce compaction), prevent erosion, and 
suppress weeds. It can also be used as a livestock forage 
between cash crops. 
 
Cereal rye absorbs unused soil nitrogen (N) remaining 
from previously grown row crop. It typically assimilates 
25-50 lb/acre N, but can retain as much as 100 lb/acre N 
(Clark, 2007). Cereal rye is compatible with multiple crop 
rotation systems in many regions. It can be used as a strip 
cover crop, overseeded, drilled, and/or broadcast. It 
overwinters well, and creates a physical barrier to weeds 
by producing large amounts of biomass (Clark, 2007). It 
also suppresses weeds chemically by producing 
allelopathic chemicals (Chase et al., 1991). Generally, 
cereal rye performs best as a cover crop or green manure 
crop if it is planted with other species, usually a legume. 

 

paranoia, hallucinations, twitches, spasms, cardiovascular 
trouble, and stillborn children, were also considered signs 
of witchcraft. Matossian (1989) suggests that at least 
some outbreaks of the plague that have occurred 
throughout history could have been the result of a 
vulnerable immune system because of rye ergot 
consumption. 

Description 
Cereal rye is an upright, cool season, annual grass.  It can 
grow 3 to 6 feet tall, has flat leaf blades, and is topped 
with awned flower spikes called heads. 

Distribution: Cereal rye is found in most of the 
continental U.S. and in Alaska. It is a cultivated 
introduced species that is thought to have originated from 
Eurasia (Yatskievych, 1999). For current distribution, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species on 
the PLANTS Web site. 

Habitat:  Cereal rye is able to grow in a wide variety of 
climate and soil conditions.  In most areas it does not 
persist well when it escapes cultivation.  It grows best 
when cultivated in light loams or sandy soils, but it will 
also do well in clay soils.  Some varieties can tolerate 
waterlogging while others do well in dry soils (Clark, 
2007). 

Adaptation 
Cereal rye is a cultivated plant and in most regions it does 
not persist very long in the wild.  There are many varieties 
of cereal rye on the market, each of which is best adapted 
to a particular geographic area, climate, and soil 
conditions (Clark, 2007; Oelke et al., 1990). To find the 
right variety or cultivar for use in your area contact your 
local NRCS office or Extension Service. 

Establishment 
Establishment methods and timing of planting depends on 
the management objective of the producer. Cereal rye is 
planted from late summer to midwinter depending on the 
geographic region (Clark, 2007). Seed should be planted 
no deeper than 2 inches (Clark, 2007). Cereal rye seed can 
be drilled, over-seeded into an existing crop, or 
broadcasted.  Seeding rates vary from 50–200 lb/ac, 
depending on climate and use. It can be planted alone or 
with other species.  For the best seeding rates, methods, 
and practices for your area contact your local NRCS 
office or Extension Service. 

Management 
Management of cereal rye can vary widely.  It can be 
managed to produce a grain crop to mill for flour, where it 
can be harvested and threshed using a combine (Oelke et 
al., 1990).  In a cover crop or green manure system, a 
multitude of management options are available.  It can be 
killed at different times for weed suppression, to prevent 
nitrogen uptake, or incorporated into soil for organic 

 

 

matter build up.  It can be terminated by plowing, disking, 
mowing, roller crimping, or with herbicides. 
 

Pests and Potential Problems 
Cereal rye is susceptible to some diseases, although it is 
generally more resistant than other cereal species (Oelke 
et al., 1990).  Ergot, stem or stalk smut, anthracnose, and 
various rusts of the leaves or stem are the most likely 
disease problems that will be encountered (Oelke et al., 
1990).  In the spring, armyworm moths are attracted to 
cereal rye and may lay eggs on it (MCCC, 2012).  It is 
important to not feed ergot infected rye to humans or 
animals as it could result in ergotism, which can cause 
convulsions, miscarriage, hallucinations, and gangrene of 
the arms, legs, fingers, and toes. 

Environmental Concerns 
Caution should be used when planting cereal rye before 
winter wheat, because volunteer rye could become a weed 
in the wheat crop.  Cereal rye is listed as a Class C 
noxious weed in Washington and should not be used 
there. 

Control 
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use it safely.  Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method.   

Seeds and Plant Production 
For seed production, the seedbed should be smooth, firm, 
and weed free. Seeds should be planted 1 to 1.5 inches 
deep (Government of Alberta, 2011).  Seeding rate will 
vary depending on climatic conditions and variety of rye 
that is being used. Typical rates average 55-60 lb/acre 
(Government of Alberta, 2011).  Soil tests can determine 
the amount and timing of any fertilizer application, but 
can be up to 50 lb N/acre (Government of Alberta, 2011).  
Rye shatters very easily. It is recommended to swath 
when moisture is around 40%, dry, and then feed through 
a combine or thresher to separate the seed from the chaff 
(Government of Alberta, 2011).   

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
Several cultivars of cereal rye are readily available for 
different geographical regions, climates, soil types, and 
use. Common varieties of cereal rye are ‘Elbon’, Noble 
Foundation , Ardmore, Oklahoma; ‘Hancock’, Wisconsin 
Agricultural Experiment Station; ‘Musketeer’, 
Agriculture Canada;  ‘Rymin’, Minnesota Agricultural 
Experiment Station; ‘Aroostook’, USDA-NRCS, Cornell 
University, and Maine Dept. of Agriculture; ‘Cougar’, 
University of Manitoba; ‘Dankowski Nowe’ (Danko), 
Dankow-Laski and Choryn experiment stations; 
‘Frederick’, South Dakota Agricultural Experiment 
Station; ‘Metzi’, Nutriseed Company; ‘Puma’, University 
of Manitoba; and ‘Von Lochow’, obtained from F. Von 
Lochow-Petkus Ltd. of Germany and released by 

Minnesota Agricultural Experiment Station; ‘Prima’, used 
in Canada and is ergot resistant; ‘AC Remington’, used in 
Canada and is ergot resistant; ‘Maton’; ‘Rosen’; ‘Dakold’.  
To find the right variety or cultivar for use in your area 
contact your local NRCS office or Extension Service. 

 

References 
Bushuk, W. 2001. Rye production and uses worldwide. 

Cereal Foods World 46:70-73. 

Chase, W.R., M.G. Nair, and A.R. Putnam. 2,2’-OXO-
1,1’-Azobenzene: selective toxicity of rye (Secale 
cereale L.) allelochemicals to weed and crop species: 
II. Journal of Chemical Ecology 17:9-19. 

Clark, A. (ed.) 2007. Managing cover crops profitably. 3rd 
ed. Sustainable Agriculture Research and Education 
(SARE) Handbook Series Book 9. Sustainable 
Agriculture Research and Education (SARE) 
Program, College Park, MD. 

Government of Alberta. 2011. Fall rye production 

http://www1.agric.gov.ab.ca/$department/deptdocs.n
sf/all/agdex1269 (verified May 2012). Government 
of Alberta Agriculture and Rural Development. 
Edmonton, Alberta. 

Matossian, M.K. 1989. Poisons of the past. Yale Univ. 

Press, New Haven. 

MCCC (Midwest Cover Crops Council). 2012. Midwest 

Cover Crops Field Guide. 
http://plantcovercrops.com/category/types-of-cover-
crops/winter-cereal-rye/ (verified May 2012). 

Oelke, E.A., E.S. Oplinger, H. Bahri, B.R. Durgan, D.H. 
Putnam, J.D. Doll, and K.A. Kelling. 1990. Rye. In: 
Alternative field crops manual [Online]. 
www.hort.purdue.edu/newcrop/afcm/ (verified May 
2012). Univ. of Wisconsin-Extension and Univ. of 
Minnesota. 

Watson, S., D.L. Fjell, J.P. Shroyer, K. Bolsen, and S. 

Duncan. 1993. Small grain cereals for forage. Kansas 
State Univ., Manhattan. 

Yatskievych, G. 1999. Steyermark’s flora of Missouri: 

volume 1. Missouri Dept. of Conservation, Jefferson 
City. 

 

Prepared By:  P. Allen Casey, USDA-NRCS Elsberry 
Plant Materials Center, Missouri 

Citation 
Casey, P.A. 2012. Plant guide for cereal rye (Secale 
cereale). USDA-Natural Resources Conservation Service, 
Plant Materials Center, Elsberry, MO. 

Published: May 2012 
Edited:03May2012 plsp; 09May2012 aym, 23May2012 
cs,    

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

