 
 

 

Plant Guide

food source for insects. Due to its toxic properties, it is 
not a good source of forage for livestock or game animals. 

Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Description 
General:  Sunflower family (Asteraceae). Tall blacktip 
ragwort is a perennial, subrhizomatous forb from a 
branching caudex. The plants have an erect growth habit 
and reach a mature height of 20 to 80 cm (8 to 32 in). The 
leaves and stems are densely hairy causing the herbage to 
appear grayish. The leaves are oblanceolate, 8 to 30 cm (3 
to 12 in) long and 1 to 4 cm (0.4 to 1.6 in) wide. The leaf 
margins are dentate to nearly entire. The inflorescence is a 
compact cluster of 15 to 60 floral heads. The floral heads 
are 6 to 8 mm (0.24 to 0.31 in) in height and 3 to 6 mm 
(0.12 to 0.24 in) wide with yellow ray and disk flowers. 
The bracts are green to brownish with black tips. The fruit 
is an achene bearing a white pappus (Welsh et al 2003). 

Distribution: Tall blacktip ragwort is found in the Rocky 
Mountain regions of Utah, Wyoming, Colorado and New 
Mexico.  For current distribution, please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 

Habitat:  Tall blacktip ragwort is found in montane plant 
communities from 2,400 to 3,600 m (7,800 to 11,800 ft). 
It is commonly associated with aspen, spruce-fir, mixed 
conifer and tall forb communities. 

Adaptation 
Tall blacktip ragwort is adapted to sites receiving 18 or 
more inches (457 mm) of mean annual precipitation. 

Establishment 
A high altitude seeding in Rocky Mountain National Park 
showed high levels of establishment and survivorship 6 
years after seeding (Harrington 1946). 

Management 
Tall blacktip ragwort has been used as a minor component 
of seed mixtures.  Management strategies should be based 
on the key species in the established plant community.  
Grazing should be deferred on seeded lands for at least 
two growing seasons to allow for full stand establishment.   

Pests and Potential Problems 
Many members of the genus Senecio are known to 
contain toxic alkaloids which can cause liver disease n 
livestock and humans (Burrows and Tyrl 2001). Tall 

TALL BLACKTIP 

RAGWORT 

Senecio atratus Greene 

Plant Symbol = SEAT 

Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Aberdeen Plant Materials 
Center  

Tall blacktip ragwort. Photo by Barry Breckling © 2009. 

Alternate Names 
Black groundsel 
Slide butterweed 

Uses 
Tall blacktip ragwort has been seeded and transplanted 
into restoration and reclamation projects at upper 
elevation sites in the Rocky Mountains. It has value as a 
 

 

blacktip ragwort has been shown to contain the alkaloids 
sarracine 2, and platynecine 3 and 4 (Stermitz and Harris 
1987).This species has also been found to be a host plant 
for the hemiparasitic paintbrush species (Castilleja 
rhexifolia and C. sulphurea). The toxic alkaloids are 
transferred from the host to the paintbrush via specialized 
root structures called haustoria which form the connection 
between the parasite and host plant (Stermitz and Harris 
1987). 

Environmental Concerns 
Tall blacktip ragwort is native to western North America. 
There are no known environmental concerns associated 
with this species. The toxic compounds found in this 
species poses a threat to grazing animals if consumed in 
sufficient quantities.   

Seeds and Plant Production 
Butler and Frieswyk (2001) reported 1 percent 
germination in an attempt to grow tall blacktip  ragwort in 
greenhouse conditions. The seed had been stored in the 
greenhouse and had not undergone any treatment prior to 
sowing. 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
There are currently no commercial releases of tall blacktip 
ragwort. Common seed may be available on the 
commercial market. 
 
The Aberdeen Plant Materials Center cooperated with the 
USDA-Agricultural Research Service, Poisonous Plants 
Laboratory to evaluate a number of Senecio and Packera 
species for toxic properties.  Based on the findings, the 
plant materials center discontinued further evaluation of 
Senecio spp. for potential release.   
References 
Burrows, G.E. and R.J. Tyrl. 2001. Toxic Plants of North 
America. Iowa State University Press. Ames, Iowa. 
1342p. 

Butler, Jennifer and C. Frieswyk. 2001. Propagation 
protocol for production of Senecio atratus seeds; 
USDI NPS - Rocky Mountain National Park, Estes 

Park, Colorado. In: Native Plant Network. URL: 
http://www.nativeplantnetwork.org (accessed 25 May 
2012). Moscow (ID): University of Idaho, College of 
Natural Resources, Forest Research Nursery. 

Harrington, H.D. 1946. Results of a seeding experiment at 
high altitudes in the Rocky Mountain National Park. 
Ecology. 27: 375-377. 

Stermitz, F.R. and G.H. Harris. 1987. Transfer of 

pyrrolizidine and quinolizidine alkaloids to Castilleja 
(Scrophulariaceae) hemiparisites from composite and 
legume host plants. Journal of Chemical Ecology. 13 
(8): 1917-1925. 

Welsh, S.L., N.D. Atwood, S. Goodrich, and L.C. 

Higgins. 2003. A Utah Flora. Third Edition, revised. 
Brigham Young University, Provo, UT. 

 
Prepared By:   
Derek Tilley, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, ID 
 
Loren St. John, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, ID 

Citation 
Tilley, D. and L. St. John. 2012. Plant Guide for tall 
blacktip ragwort (Senecio atratus). USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Aberdeen Plant 
Materials Center. Aberdeen, Idaho 83210. 

Published June 2012 
Edited: 5June2012djt; 5 June2012ls; 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

