 
 

 

Plant Guide

dedicated pollinators, and have been found 
colonizing trial plots on research farms (Cane 2011).   
 
Forage:  Plants in the Sphaeralcea genus are 
important forage sources for a number of rodents, 
rabbits and other lagomorphs, and ungulates such as 
deer and antelope (Beale and Smith 1970; Pendery 
and Rumbaugh 1986, Rumbaugh et al. 1993).  
Browsing deer will often consume all of the foliage 
and leave only the woody base.   
 
Ornamental:  Munro’s globemallow is hardy to Zone 
4 and is recommended for rock gardens, banks, desert 
shrub areas, and along driveways and walkways 
(Rugged Country Plants 2011).  This plant is also 
suitable for container planting (Cane 2011).  For an 
attractive appearance, High Country Gardens (2011) 
suggests cutting the plants to the ground level every 
year.   
 
Range revegetation: This plant is one of the gems of 
the arid west.  It can be used to add aesthetic beauty 
and diversity to range landscapes. 
 
Ethnobotanical: People of the Gosiute tribe made 
paint with the flowers and applied it to the inside of 
their earthenware dishes (Native American 
Ethnobotany Database 2011). 

Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Description 
General:  Mallow family (Malvaceae).  Sphaeralcea 
munroana is a native perennial forb or subshrub.  It 
has a taproot, an open branching form and grows to 
20 to 80 cm (8 to 32 inches) tall.  Leaves and stems 
are pale green and have a slightly rough texture due 
to a covering of fine white hairs.  Leaves are 
alternate, petiolate, have round-toothed margins, 
three to five lobes, and are 2 to 6 cm (0.8 to 2.4 in) 
long. Flowers and buds are on showy clusters in leaf 
axils and bloom May through August. The flowers 
have a diameter of 2 cm (0.75 in), five pale orange to 
brick-red petals, and numerous stamens.  Seeds are 
produced in dry fruits with multiple capsules that 
form a sphere, and there is one seed per capsule.  
Seeds are pubescent and average 1.5 mm (0.06 in) in 
length (Rydberg 1917; Lyons and Merilees 1995; 
Burke Museum of Natural History and Culture 2011).  
 

GLOBEMALLOW 
Sphaeralcea munroana 

(Douglas) Spach 
Plant Symbol = SPMU2 

MUNRO’S 

 
Contributed by:  NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Pullman, WA 

 

Sphaeralcea munroana. Pamela Pavek 

Alternate Names 
Orange globemallow, desert mallow, whitestem 
globemallow (S. munroana ssp. subrhomboidea), 
Malva munroana, Nuttallia munroana, Malvastrum 
munroana, Malveopsis munroana 
 
Uses 
Pollinator habitat:  Munro’s globemallow attracts 
many species of bees, a few of which are specialists, 
requiring pollen and nectar only from Sphaeralcea 
and related genera.  These include the ground-nesting 
bees Diadasia diminuta, D. lutzi, and Colletes 
sphaeralcea.  The Diadasia are proficient and 

 

The genus name Sphaeralcea is from the Greek word 
“spharia” which is a globe (referring to the spherical 
fruits) and the Latin word “alcea” which means a 
kind of mallow.  The species name munroana refers 
to Dr. Donald Munro (1789 – 1853) who was the 
Curator of Gardens at the Horticultural Society of 
London, a Fellow of the Linnean Society, and 
gardener-in-chief for British botanist John Lindley 
(Charters 2011). 
 

Cross section of S. munroana fruit showing individual 
seeds in each capsule.  James Cane, ARS 

 

Distribution:  Munro’s globemallow is found 
throughout British Columbia and the western states 
of Washington, Idaho, Montana, Wyoming, 
Colorado, Utah, Nevada, Oregon and California.  The 
taxon is divided into two subspecies:  ssp. munroana 
which is found throughout the species’ entire range, 
and ssp. subrhomboidea which is found only in 
Oregon, Idaho, Wyoming and Utah.  Subspecies 
subrhomboidea is also known by the common name 
whitestem globemallow.  For current distribution, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species 
on the PLANTS Web site. 

Habitat:  This plant is typically found in association 
with sagebrush on desert plains to low mountain 
slopes (Lyons and Merilees 1995; Hichcock and 
Cronquist 1973). 

Adaptation 
Munro’s globemallow is adapted to dry areas with 
open exposure.  It is often found growing in rocky, 
sandy soil but also grows well in heavy clay (High 
Country Gardens 2011).  Annual precipitation 
requirements range from 15 to 38 cm (6 to 15 in). 

Establishment 
Munro’s globemallow can be established by seed or 
seedlings.  Seed should be planted with a drill into a 
weed-free seed bed at a rate of 4 kg PLS per ha (3.5 

 

 

lbs PLS per acre) and at a depth of 0.6 cm (0.25 in) 
(Lambert 2005).  When planted in a mix, the seeding 
rate should be adjusted according to the proportion of 
the mix.  The seed has an impermeable seed coat and 
should be scarified using boiling water or other 
treatment prior to planting if a high initial 
germination rate is desired (see Seeds and Plant 
Production below).   
 
Seedlings can be produced by sowing treated seed in 
containers in a greenhouse in January and hardened 
off for 2 to 4 weeks prior to transplanting to a 
prepared field site in the spring.  Plants should be 
spaced 25 to 75 cm (10 to 30 in) apart (Rugged 
Country Plants 2011).   

A globemallow bee (Diadasia diminuta) visiting a 
Munro's globemallow flower. James Cane, ARS 

Management 
For optimal production of Sphaeralcea munroana 
seed, the pollination services of bees are required.  
James Cane, ARS (2011) has found outcrossing of S. 
munroana increases seed production 4-fold.  He also 
discovered in one study 37 out of 57 of the bees that 
visited S. munroana and related plant species were 
ground-nesting floral specialists, such as Diadasia 
diminuta, D. lutzi, and Colletes sphaeralcea. The 
other 20 species that visited were also ground-nesting 
but floral generalists.  Honey bees will work the 
flowers, but their pollination efficacy is unknown.  
To enhance ground-nesting bee habitat, do not 
cultivate around or within the plot during bloom. 
 

Turrets indicate the presence of globemallow bee 
(Diadasia diminuta) nests.  Vince Tepedino, ARS 

 

 

Dunne (2011) a private seed producer in Worland, 
WY, has found fields of Sphaeralcea munroana are 
easily established and weeds can be controlled with 
the proper application of herbicides.  However, due 
to the seed’s hard coat and levels of dormancy, 
volunteer plants are problematic during the years of 
production because they interfere with between-row 
cultivation operations and have high amounts of 
green growth at harvest.  Furthermore, volunteer 
plants will emerge in succeeding crops for many 
years.  The volunteers cannot be controlled with 
applications of pre-emergent herbicides or glyphosate 
(Dunne 2011). 
 
Dunne (2011) and other commercial seed producers 
have also found the plant’s indeterminance to be 
problematic.  With summer precipitation or 
irrigation, Munro’s globemallow will remain green 
and continue to flower throughout the growing 
season.  Compounding this problem, seeds will 
shatter soon after ripening.  Dunne (2011) states 
Munro’s globemallow can easily be harvested with a 
combine, however small amounts of seed harvestable 
at one time causes production to be economically 
unviable.  In areas where irrigation is the only source 
of summer moisture, it may be possible to manipulate 
the plant’s determinance by shutting off irrigation 
early in the growing season.   
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
This species is susceptible to a fungal rust pathogen 
(Puccinia sherardiana) (Dunne 2011).  Seed can be 
damaged by weevils of the genus Macrorhoptus 
(Cane 2011).   

Environmental Concerns 
None 

Seeds and Plant Production 
Harvested seed can be cleaned by processing with a 
brush machine (Barner 2009) or hammer mill and air 
screening equipment.  There are approximately 
804,760 seeds per kilogram (365,800 seeds per 
pound) (Barner 2009).   
 
S. munroana and other members of the Sphaeralcea 
genus have an impermeable seed coat which causes 
challenges for plant production.  Cold moist 
stratification with no other pretreatment is unlikely to 
result in satisfactory germination. At the Pullman 
Plant Materials Center, seed of three accessions was 
planted into containers in mid October 2009, 
stratified outside for 90 days and moved into a 
greenhouse.  Seed germinated within 7 to 14 days 
and achieved germination rates of 6%, 14% and 25%.   
 
Smith and Kratsch (2009) report significant 
germination improvements for S. munroana seed 
(84% average germination) following the 
combination of scarification (nicking the seed) and a 

 

6 wk cold stratification.  Kildisheva and Davis (2011) 
examined the effects of seed piercing with a steel 
blade, 6 wk cold stratification (4.6±0.02 C) and 
combined scarification plus stratification.  
Germination was significantly improved with both 
the scarification (35 %) and the combined 
scarification and stratification (44 %) treatments.  
 
Kildisheva and Davis (2011) also compared the 
effects of scarification with a steel blade, 
submergence in a 100 ppm gibberellic acid (GA3) 
solution, submergence in deionized water, and the 
combination of these treatments. Scarification alone 
and scarification followed by a 24 hour water or GA3 
soak achieved the highest germination (87%, 93 % 
and 88 %, respectively) at the end of the 21 day 
period. Seeds soaked in distilled water for 24 hrs 
achieved significantly higher germination than those 
soaked for 48 hrs. However, a similar relationship did 
not exist between scarified seeds soaked in GA3. 
 
Although mechanical scarification can be an effective 
dormancy treatment, many mechanized techniques 
can cause embryo damage, primarily a result of 
scarification severity. Page et al. (1966) and Roth et 
al. (1987) suggest seeds of S. munroana died 
following mechanical scarification in a sandpaper-
lined rotating drum, irrelevant of treatment duration.  
 
Chemical scarification treatments have been shown 
to be effective for some Sphaeralcea species (Page et 
al. 1966, Sabo et al. 1979, Roth et al. 1987, Smith 
and Kratsch 2009).  For instance, submergence in 18 
M sulfuric acid (H2SO4) for 10 min significantly 
increased germination of S. coccinea (77 %) and two 
accessions of S. grossulariifolia (69 % and 62 %, 
respectively) however failed to do so for S. munroana 
(8 %) (Roth et al. 1987).  Improved germination of S. 
munroana (53%) was achieved with a 3-hr soak in 
the organic solvent diethyl dioxide (C4H10O2) (Roth 
et al.1987).  
 
An alternative technique, submergence in boiling 
water, can be effective for large-scale seed treatment.  
Jensen (2011) at the Forest Service Shrub Sciences 
Lab in Provo, Utah, has found an improvement in 
germination with application of boiling water prior to 
planting.  He also found with this treatment, no 
stratification period is necessary.  Kildisheva and 
Davis (2011) compared the effects of a10-sec 
submergence in boiling water, tumbling with 
aluminum oxide, burning, heat application at 80 C for 
1 hr, and the combination of burning and heating.  
Seeds subject to the boiling water treatment reached 
the highest cumulative germination (49%); while 
seeds subject to the remaining treatments did not 
exceed 20% germination. 

 

 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
‘ARS-2892’ is select-class germplasm released by 
the ARS in 1993.  Seed was collected from plants 
growing on the Hyrum Lake Dam in Cache County, 
UT and compared to 49 other accessions of 
Sphaeralcea species. It was selected for its large 
shoot size, succulence, leafy growth form and seed 
yield potential (Rumbaugh and Pendery 1993).   

References 
Barner, J. 2009. Propagation protocol for production 

of Sphaeralcea munroana (Douglas) Spach 
seeds; USDA Forest Service – F6 Bend 
Extractory, Bend, OR. In: Native Plant Network 
[Online] Available at: 
http://www.nativeplantnetwork.org (Accessed 8 
Feb 2011). 

Beale, D.M. and A.D. Smith. 1970. Forage use, water 

consumption, and productivity of pronghorn 
antelope in Western Utah. Journal of Wildlife 
Management 34:570-582. 

Burke Museum of Natural History and Culture.  

[Online]. Available at: 
http://biology.burke.washington.edu/herbarium/i
magecollection.php (Accessed 3 Feb 2011). 
University of Washington, Seattle, WA. 

Cane, J.H. 2011. Unpublished data. USDA ARS Bee 

Biology and Systematics Lab, Logan, UT. 

Charters, M.L. 2011.  California Plant Names: Latin 
and Greek Meanings and Derivations. [Online] 
Available at: 
http://www.calflora.net/botanicalnames/  
(Accessed 3 Feb 2011).  

Dunne, R. 2011. Personal communication. 
High Country Gardens. 2011. [Online] Available at: 
http://www.highcountrygardens.com/catalog/pro
duct/91940 (Accessed 3 Feb 2011). 

Hitchcock, C.L. and A. Cronquist. 1973. Flora of the 

Pacific Northwest. University of Washington 
Press, Seattle and London. 

Jensen, S.L. 2011. Personal communication. 
Kildisheva, O.A. and A.S. Davis. 2011. Unpublished 

Data.  University of Idaho Center of Forest 
Nursery and Seedling Research, Moscow, ID. 

Lyons, C.P. and B. Merilees. 1995. Trees, Shrubs and 

Flowers to Know in Washington and British 
Columbia. Lone Pine Publishing, Auburn, WA, 
Vancouver, BC and Edmonton, AB.  

Native American Ethnobotany Database. 2011. 

[Online] Available at http://herb.umd.umich.edu/ 
(Accessed 1Feb 2011). University of Michigan, 
Dearborn, MI. 

Page, R.J., D.L. Goodwin, and N. E. West. 1966. 

Germination requirements of scarlet 
globemallow. Journal of Range Management 
19:145-146. 

Pendery, B.M. and M.D. Rumbaugh. 1986. 

Globemallows: forbs for Utah rangelands. Utah 
Science 47:41-45. 

Roth, T.E., J.L. Holechek, and M.Y. Hussain. 1987. 
Germination resposne of 3 globemallow species 
to chemical treatment. Journal of Range 
Management 40:173-175. 

Rugged Country Plants. 2011. [Online] Available at: 
http://www.ruggedcountryplants.com/sphaeralce
a.munroana.htm (Accessed 1 Feb 2011). 

Rumbaugh, M.D. and B.M. Pendery. 1993. 

Registration of ARS-2892 Munroe globemallow. 
Crop Sci. 33:1108. 

Rumbaugh, M.D., H.F. Mayland, B.M. Pendery, and 

G.E. Shewmaker. 1993. Utilization of 
Globemallow (Sphaeralcea) taxa by sheep. J. of 
Range Mgmt. 46:103-109. 

Rydberg, P.A. 1917. Flora of the Rocky Mountains 
and adjacent plains, Colorado, Utah, Wyoming, 
Idaho, Montana, Saskatchewan, Alberta, and 
neighboring parts of Nebraska, South Dakota, 
and British Columbia. The author, New York. 
Sabo, D.G., G.U. Johnson, W.C. Martin and E.F. 
Aldon. 1979. Germination requirements of 19 
species of arid land plants. USDA Forest 
Severvice Research Paper RM-210. Rocky 
Mountain Forest and Range Esperiment Station, 
Fort Collins, Colorado. 

Smith, A. and H. Kratsch. 2009. Seed Propagation of 

Sphaeralcea (Globemallow). Hortscience 
44:1139-1140. 

Tepedino, V. 2010. Globe mallow bee (Diadasia 

diminuta). [Online] Available at 
http://www.fs.fed.us/wildflowers/pollinators/poll
inator-of-the-month/globe_mallow_bee.shtml 
(Accessed 2 Feb 2011). ARS Bee Research Lab, 
Logan, UT. 

 
Prepared By 
Pamela L.S. Pavek, USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Pullman, Washington 
 
James H. Cane, USDA ARS Bee Biology and 
Systematics Lab, Logan, Utah 
 
Olga A. Kildisheva, University of Idaho Center of 
Forest Nursery and Seedling Research, Moscow, 
Idaho 
 
Anthony S. Davis, University of Idaho Center of 
Forest Nursery and Seedling Research,, Moscow, 
Idaho 
 
Citation 
Pavek, P.L.S., J.H. Cane, O.A. Kildisheva and A.S. 
Davis. 2011. Plant guide for Munro’s globemallow 
(Sphaeralcea munroana). USDA Natural Resources 
Conservation Service. Pullman, WA. 

Published March 2011 
Edited: 16Mar11 oak; 16Mar11 asd; 29Mar11 jab; 
29Mar plsp 

 

 

For more information about this and other plants, 
please contact your local NRCS field office or 
Conservation District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ 
and visit the PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant Materials Program 
Web site http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or 
availability of other Web sites. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

