 

 

SORGHUM 

Sorghum bicolor (L.) Moench 

Plant Symbol = SOBI2 

Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Tucson Plant Materials 
Center  

Flowering sorghum seed head and vegetation in Tucson, Arizona. 
(Photo by Jonathan Walther, USDA-NRCS, Tucson Plant Materials 
Center)  

 

Alternate Names 
Alternate Common Names:  sweet sorghum, sorgo 
forrajero (Spanish), durra (Africa), guinea corn, black 
amber, chicken corn, shattercane, wild cane, broomcorn, 
grain sorghum, forage sorghum, Sudangrass 
 
Alternate Scientific Names:   
Sorghum vulgare Pers., 
Andropogon sorghum (L.). Brot.,  
Sorghum bicolor (L.) Moench ssp. arundinaceum (Desv.) 
de Wet & Harlan,  
Sorghum bicolor (L.) Moench ssp. bicolor,  
Sorghum bicolor (L.) Moench ssp. drummondii (Nees ex 
Steud.) de Wet & Harlan 

 

 

Plant Guide

Uses 
Cover Crop:  Sorghum is used as a drought tolerant, 
summer annual rotational cover crop either alone or 
seeded in a warm season cover crop mixture.  There are 
multiple cultivars of sorghum available for use as a cover 
crop including sorghum-Sudangrass hybrids (Sorghum 
bicolor x Sorghum bicolor var. sudanense). However, all 
sorghum and Sudangrass-related species have the 
potential to smother weeds, suppress nematode species, 
and penetrate compacted subsoil (Clark, 2007).  Sorghum 
cover crops can also be used as livestock forage in a 
cropping system (Magdoff and Van Es, 2009).  Sorghum-
Sudangrass hybrids can produce up to 4,000-5,000 
pounds of dry matter per acre (Clark, 2007). 
 
Soil Compaction: Sorghums and sorghum-Sudangrass 
hybrids have extensive root systems that can penetrate up 
to 8 feet into the soil and extend more than 3 feet away 
from the stem (Shoemaker and Bransby, 2010). These 
aggressive root systems alleviate subsoil compaction. To 
encourage more significant root growth, sorghum stalks 
should be cut at least once during the growing season 
when they reach 3–4 feet tall (Clark, 2007).   
 
Weed Management: Sorghums are quick growing grasses 
that have the potential to shade out and/or smother weed 
populations when planted at a high density. In addition, 
root exudates of sorghum have been shown to reduce the 
growth of weeds such as velvet leaf, thorn apple, redroot 
pigweed, crabgrass, yellow foxtail and barnyardgrass 
(Stapleton et al., 2010). Sorghum is also recommended 
for control of nutsedge infestations (Clark, 2007).  
 
One of the most studied root exudates of sorghum is the 
compound sorgoleone. Sorgoleone is produced 
exclusively by sorghum species and suppresses the 
growth of many plant species, but it is most active on 
small seeded species (Dayan et al., 2010). Sorgoleone 
activity in the soil is similar to the activity of a pre-plant 
incorporated herbicide. Detectable levels of sorgoleone 
have been measured up to seven weeks after incorporation 
(Dayan et al., 2010).   
 
Root exudates also have the potential to harm annual and 
perennial crop species such as tomato, lettuce, and 
broccoli. However, researchers in California found that 
the harmful effects of sorghum root exudates are less 
persistent when sorghum residues are shredded and/or 
incorporated into the soil (Stapleton, 2010).   
 
Pest Management: Sorghum-Sudangrass hybrids have 
been reported to inhibit some species of nematodes in 
subsequent crops. The suppressive activity of the hybrids 

is due to their production of natural nematicidal 
compounds (Clark, 2007), their poor host status, general 
stimulation of microbial antagonists, and the release of 
toxic products during decomposition (Magdoff and Van 
Es, 2009). For maximum suppression of soilborne 
diseases, cut or chopped Sudangrass must be immediately 
well incorporated (Clark, 2007).  
 
Some cultivars of sorghum harbor beneficial insects such 
as seven-spot lady beetles and lacewings (Clark, 2007). 
Encouraging beneficial insects is an important part of an 
integrated pest management plan.   
 
Forage: Sorghum and sorghum-Sudangrass hybrids are 
all very palatable and are highly valued as forage crops. 
They can be used as silage, hay, green chop, or in 
pastures. Sorghum and Sudangrass plants contain a 
compound called dhurrin, which can break down to 
release prussic acid (hydrogen cyanide, HCN) 
(Undersander, 2003). Prussic acid is released from the 
sugars within the plant during frosts, decomposition, 
drought stress, and mechanical damage (Dover, 2004).  
Livestock may show symptoms of prussic acid poisoning 
within 5 minutes of ingestion and may die within 15 
minutes (Stichler and Reagor, 2001).   
 
Biofuel Production: Sorghum cultivars are studied 
intensively as potential biofuel sources due to their high 
biomass yield and sugar production.  The sugars 
sorghums produce give it an economical advantage over 
starch based crops for biofuel use.  Other desirable 
characteristics of sorghum that make it an attractive 
biofuel crop for use on marginal lands include its wide 
range of adaptation, drought resistance, and salinity 
tolerance (Shoemaker and Bransby, 2010).  
 
Ethnobotany: Sorghum bicolor was domesticated in 
Africa 3000 years ago (Barkworth, 2003).  The first 
recorded appearance of sorghum in Europe was in the 
first century A.D. and it was introduced to the United 
States in the 1850’s for syrup production (Winberry, 
1983).  It is still one of the most important grain crops 
grown for human consumption and animal feeding 
throughout the world.   
 
Sorghum grain is gluten free and is a good substitute for 
cereal grains such as wheat, barley, and rye for 
individuals with celiac disease.  Other uses for sorghum 
worldwide include beer production (Africa), distilled 
alcoholic beverages (China), wall boards, and packaging 
materials (Delserone, 2008).   

Status 
Sorghum bicolor is a state listed noxious weed in Indiana, 
Maryland, Nevada, and Pennsylvania.  It is listed as a 
secondary noxious weed in Iowa when not cultivated, and 
a prohibited noxious weed in Ohio.  Please consult the 
PLANTS Web site and your State Department of Natural 
Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., threatened 

or endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland 
indicator values). 

Description 
General: Sorghum is an upright, short-day, summer 
annual that is a member of the Poaceae family.  The grass 
blades are flat, stems are rigid, and there are no creeping 
rhizomes.  Sorghum has a loose, open panicle of short, 
few-flowered racemes.  As seed matures, the panicle may 
droop.  Glumes vary in color from red or reddish brown to 
yellowish and are at least three quarters as long as the 
elliptical grain.  The grain is predominately red or reddish 
brown (Kearney and Peebles, 1969; Barkworth, 2003).   
 
Sorghums exhibit different heights and maturity dates 
depending on whether they are grain sorghums (Sorghum 
bicolor ssp. bicolor), forage sorghums (Sorghum bicolor), 
Sudangrass (Sorghum bicolor ssp. drummondii), or 
sorghum-Sudangrass hybrids (Sorghum bicolor x 
Sorghum bicolor var. sudanense).  Growth characteristics 
also vary depending on the location grown, inputs, and 
agronomic practices.  In general, forage sorghums are 
taller plants with later maturity dates and more vegetative 
growth than grain sorghums.  Sudangrass and sorghum-
Sudangrass hybrids fall in between grain sorghums and 
forage sorghums in height (Undersander, 2003).   
 
Distribution:   
Sorghums are of tropical origin (Barkworth, 2003), but 
have spread all over the world, with current production in 
many countries including Africa, China, Central and 
South America, India, and the United States.  For current 
distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page for this 
species on the PLANTS website.   

Adaptation 
Sorghum will grow in low fertility, moderately acidic and 
highly alkaline soils, but it is best adapted to fertile, well 
drained soils at a pH between 6.0–6.5.  Sorghum is not 
tolerant of frost, shade, or sustained flooding (Clark, 
2007; FAO, 2012; Undersander, 2003). 

Establishment 
Sorghum can be established in conventional, reduced 
tillage, or no till cropping systems with drill seeding or 
broadcasting.  Soil temperatures should be between 60–
70°F before planting sorghum.  The recommended 
seeding depth for all sorghums is ¾–1 ¼ inches in heavy 
soils and up to 2 inches in sandy soils (Undersander, 
2003).   
 
If planting sorghum for cover crop, pest management, 
and/or weed control, some general recommendations are 
to broadcast seed at 40–50 lb per acre or drill seed at 35–
40 lb per acre (Clark, 2007).  Lower seeding rates are 
typically used if planting sorghum for other purposes or 
with other species.  Seeding rates will vary widely 
depending upon the method of planting, the type of 
sorghum planted, and the goals of the planting.  For the 

 

 

best seeding rates, methods, and practices for your area 
contact your local NRCS office or Extension service.   

Management 
Fertilization: Fertilizer application frequency and 
amounts will vary with the type of sorghum planted and 
the goals of the planting.  Soils should be tested prior to 
planting to determine fertilizer requirements.  Sorghum 
biomass will increase with the amount of nitrogen 
applied.  Standard biomass production (4,000-5,000 
pounds of dry matter per acre) will require applications of 
75–100 lb of nitrogen/acre (Clark, 2007).  
 
Forage/grazing management: All sorghums grow tall and 
develop thick stalks if left unmanaged.  Timely 
mowing/grazing is important because tall, fibrous plants 
are difficult to mow or otherwise incorporate into soils.  
Mowing or grazing when stalks are 3–4 feet tall 
encourages tillering and deeper root growth and keeps 
regrowth vegetative and less fibrous (Clark, 2007).   
 
General recommendations to avoid prussic acid poisoning 
when using sorghums for forage include waiting until 
plants are 18–30 inches tall before grazing and not 
grazing closer than 5–7 inches if regrowth is desired.  In 
addition, do not graze immediately after a killing frost 
(Teutsch, 2009; Undersander, 1990; Undersander, 2003).    
 
Cover crop termination: Sorghum can be killed with 
herbicide, tillage, and flail chopping.  The large quantity 
of biomass sorghum can produce has the ability to tie up 
nitrogen and other nutrients.  Sicklebar mowing, disking, 
or flailchopping before tillage will shred biomass into 
smaller pieces, accelerate residue decomposition, and 
decrease the likelihood of nitrogen being unavailable to 
the subsequent crop (Dover, 2004).  In no till cropping 
systems, flail chopping after frost, or using herbicide to 
kill sorghum is recommended (Clark, 2007).   
 
If using sorghum for weed control, a California study has 
shown that weeds were suppressed for longer periods of 
time when sorghum residues were left on the soil surface 
versus soil incorporation (Stapleton, 2010).   

Pests and Potential Problems 
There are a multitude of bacterial, fungal, and viral 
diseases of sorghum (Kucharek, 1992; Toler, 1985).  
Common fungal diseases include anthracnose, leaf blight, 
sorghum downy mildew, zonate leaf spot, rough spot, 
sorghum rust, charcoal rot, and stalk rot/grain mold. Grain 
can also be affected by fungal smut. Most viral diseases 
of sorghum are mosaics with the most important being 
maize dwarf mosaic (Toler, 1985).  One of the most 
common bacterial diseases of sorghum is bacterial leaf 
stripe (Kucharek, 1992).   
 
Insect pests of sorghum can be split into groups including 
soil and seedling (wireworms, white grubs, beetle larvae, 
rootworms, cornstalk borers, cutworms, and chinch bugs), 

 

 

leaf and stalk boring (aphids, greenbugs, whorl-worms, 
budworms, fall armyworms, grasshoppers, mites, stalk 
boring moth caterpillars), and panicle and seed pests 
(sorghum midge, corn earworms, fall armyworms, 
sorghum webworms, stink bugs, false chinch bugs) 
(Teetes and Pendelton, 1999; Buntin, 2012).   
 
General guidelines for the control of disease and insect 
pests are the selection of resistant hybrids, planting 
disease-free seed at the appropriate soil temperatures, 
avoiding field operations when foliage is wet, proper crop 
rotation, control of weeds, and removing or burying crop 
debris (Kucharek, 1992; Teetes and Pendelton, 1999; 
Buntin, 2012). Identification of individual diseases and 
insects is paramount when choosing control methods.  
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
for assistance in proper identification of diseases and/or 
insect pests in your fields.   

Environmental Concerns 
A subspecies of sorghum, shattercane (Sorghum bicolor 
ssp. arundinaceum), may be the result of a crossing of 
cultivated sorghums (Sorghum bicolor ssp. bicolor) and 
Johnsongrass (Sorghum halepense), an invasive, noxious 
weed in many parts of the U.S. (Hill, 1983).  To prevent 
crossing of cultivated sorghums with Johnsongrass use 
sterile sorghum cultivars and control Johnsongrass 
infestations.   

Control 
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use it safely.  Always read label safety 
instructions for each control method.   

Seeds and Plant Production 
When planting for seed production, a firm weed free 
seedbed is needed.  Seeds can be planted up to 2 inches 
deep depending on soil textures.  The seeding rate may 
vary widely depending on the variety being planted and 
row spacing. A general recommendation is to calculate 
seeding rates based on desired plant populations per acre 
rather than pounds of seed per acre due to the large 
variances in the seed sizes of sorghum varieties (Kansas 
State University, 1998).  Sorghums cross pollinate, 
requiring seed production fields to be isolated by 
approximately 3,000 ft from other sorghum crops (FAO, 
2012). 
 
Fertilizer applications should be based upon soil tests.  
The nutrient requirements of sorghum seed production are 
similar to that of corn. Sorghum seed is sensitive to 
fertilizer burn. Fertilizer should be incorporated into the 
soil prior to planting or otherwise applied to avoid 
seedling damage (Undersander, 1990). Fertilizer should 
be applied so that nitrogen is available during the 
vigorous growth stages. By the boot stage of sorghums, 
65–70% of the total nitrogen has been taken into the plant 
(Kansas State University, 1998).   

Sorghum seed is harvested by combine when the seed 
moisture content is less than 30%.  Sorghum seed is 
susceptible to damage during threshing and careful 
operation of the combine is necessary to minimize losses.  
Recommended cylinder speeds are 750-1300 R.P.M.  
Sorghum grain must be dried thoroughly and stored in 
clean containers to prevent mold development (Carter et 
al., 1990; Kansas State University, 1998).   

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
Cultivars of sorghum are readily available for different 
geographical regions, climates, soil types, disease 
resistance, and uses.  To find the right variety or cultivar 
for use in your area contact your local NRCS office or 
Extension Service.   

References 
Barkworth, M. 2003. Sorghum Moench. In: Flora of 

North America Vol 25 Magnoliophyta: 
Commelinidae (in part): Poaceae, Part 2. Oxford 
Univ. Press, New York. p. 626–630. 

Björkman, T., and J.W. Shail. 2010. Sudangrass and 
sorghum-Sudangrass. Cornell Univ. Cooperative 
Extension Fact Sheet 14, Ithaca. 
http://www.hort.cornell.edu/bjorkman/lab/covercrops
/pdf/sudangrass.pdf (accessed 1 August 2012). 

Buntin, D.G. 2012. Grain sorghum insect pests and their 

management. Univ. of Georgia Coop. Ext. Bull. 
1283, Griffin.  
http://www.caes.uga.edu/publications/pubDetail.cfm?
pk_id=7797 (accessed 1 August 2012). 

Carter, P.R., D.R. Hicks, E.S. Oplinger, J.D. Doll, L.G. 
Bundy, R.T. Schuler and B.J. Holmes. 1990. Grain 
sorghum (milo). In: Alternative field crops manual. 
Wisconsin and Minnesota Cooperative Extension, 
Univ. of Wisconsin, Madison, and Univ. of 
Minnesota, St. Paul. 

Clark, A. (ed.) 2007. Managing cover crops profitably, 3rd 
ed. National SARE Outreach Handbook Series Book 
9. Natl. Agric. Lab., Beltsville, MD. 

Delserone, L.M. 2007. Sorghum. J. of Agric. & Food 

Information 8:9–14.  

Dayan, F.E., A.M. Rimando, Z. Pan, S.R. Baerson, A.L. 

Gimsing, and S.O. Duke. 2010. Sorgoleone. 
Phytochemistry 71:1032–1039.  

Dover, K., K.H. Wang, and R. McSorley. 2004. 

Nemotode management using sorghum and its 
relatives. Florida Cooperative Extension ENY716, 
Gainesville.    

Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). 2012. 

Sorghum bicolor (L.) Moench. In: Grassland Species 
Profiles Database [online]. 
www.fao.org/ag/agp/agpc/doc/gbase/data/pf000319.h
tm (accessed 17 July 2012).   

Han, L.P., Y. Steinberger, Y.L. Zhao, and G. H. Xie. 
2011. Accumulation and partitioning of nitrogen, 
phosphorus and potassium in different varieties of 
sweet sorghum. Field Crops Res. 120:230–240.  

 

 

Hill, R. 1983. Johnsongrass, Sorghum halepense (L.) 

Pers. and shattercane, Sorghum bicolor (L.) Moench 
ssp. drummondii (Steud.) de Wet. Regulatory 
Horticulture Weed Circular No. 4. Pennsylvania Dep. 
of Agric., Harrisburg. 
http://www.agriculture.state.pa.us/portal/server.pt/gat
eway/PTARGS_0_2_24476_10297_0_43/AgWebsite
/Files/Publications/shattercane%20article.pdf 
(accessed 17 July 2012).  

Kansas State University. 1998. Grain sorghum production 

handbook, C-687. Kansas State Univ. Agric. 
Experiment Stn. and Cooperative Extension Serv., 
Manhattan.   

Kearney, T.H., and R.H. Peebles. 1969. Sorghum. In: 

Arizona flora. Univ. of California Press, Berkeley. p. 
142–143. 

Kucharek, T. 1992. Foliar and head diseases of sorghum 
in Florida. Circular 1073, Florida Coop. Ext. Serv., 
Gainesville.   

Magdoff, F., and H. Van Es. 2009. Building soils for 

better crops, sustainable soil management. 
Sustainable Agric. Publ., Waldorf, MD. 

Michaud, J.P., R.J. Whitworth, and H. Davis. 2012. 

Sorghum insect management. MF742. Kansas State 
Univ. Agric. Experiment Stn. and Cooperative 
Extension Serv., Manhattan.  
http://www.ksre.ksu.edu/bookstore/pubs/mf742.pdf 
(accessed 31 July 2012).  

Shoemaker, C.E., and D.I. Bransby. 2010. The role of 

sorghum as a bioenergy feedstock. In: R. Braun, D. 
Karlen, and D. Johnson, editors, Sustainable 
alternative fuel feedstock opportunities, challenges 
and roadmaps for six U.S. regions, Proceeedings of 
the Sustainable Feedstocks for Advance Biofuels 
Workshop, Atlanta, GA. 28–30 September. Soil and 
Water Conserv. Soc., Ankeny, IA. p. 149–159.   
Stapleton, J., C.G. Summers, J.P. Mitchell, and T.S. 
Prather. 2010. Deleterious activity of cultivated 
grasses (Poaceae) and residues on soilborne fungal, 
nematode and weed pests. Phytoparasitica 38:61–69. 

Stichler, C., and J.C. Reagor. 2001. Nitrate and prussic 

acid poisoning. Texas Agric. Ext. Serv., College 
Station.   

Teetes, G., and B.B. Pendelton. 1999. Insect pests of 

sorghum. Texas A&M Univ.  
http://sorghumipm.tamu.edu (accessed 31 July 2012).  

Teutsch, C. 2009. Warm season annual grasses for 

summer forage. Virginia Cooperative Extension Publ. 
418-004, Blackstone.  http://pubs.ext.vt.edu/418/418-
004/418-004.html (accessed 1 August 2012).    
Toler, Robert. 1985. Maize dwarf mosaic, the most 
important virus disease of sorghum. Plant Dis. 
69:1011–1015.  

Undersander, D. 2003. Sorghums, Sudangrasses, and 

sorghum-Sudan hybrids. Univ. of Wisconsin Focus 
on Forage 5:5, Madison. 
http://www.uwex.edu/CES/crops/uwforage/Sorghum
sFOF.htm (accessed 1 July 2012).    

Undersander, D.J, L.H. Smith, A.R. Kaminski, K.A. 

Kelling, and J.D. Doll. 1990. Sorghum-forage. In: 
Alternative field crops manual. Wisconsin and 
Minnesota Cooperative Extension, Univ. of 
Wisconsin, Madison, and Univ. of Minnesota, St. 
Paul. 
http://www.hort.purdue.edu/newcrop/afcm/forage.ht
ml (accessed 1 July 2012).  

Winberry, J. 1980. The sorghum syrup industry: 1854-

1975. Agric. Hist. 54:343–352.  

 
Prepared By:  Heather Dial, USDA-NRCS Tucson Plant 
Materials Center, Arizona 

Citation 
 Dial, H.L. 2012. Plant guide for sorghum (Sorghum 

bicolor L.). USDA-Natural Resources Conservation 
Service, Tucson Plant Materials Center, Tucson, AZ.  

Published February 2013 

Edited: 23Oct2012 aym, 08 Jan2013cms, 11Feb2012 erg 

 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

 

