 
 

Plant Guide

 

Ornamental: Idaho blue-eyed grass makes a pleasing 
addition to any garden landscape.  The plant is evergreen 
and, due to a short stature, is a suitable border highlight 
for all seasons.  Small but attractive bluish flowers bloom 
mid-spring to mid-summer and compliment other floral 
variety.  Once established in a seasonally moist or well-
watered area, it is relatively low maintenance and will add 
plant and insect biodiversity.   

Status 
This forb has facultative wetland indicator status in 
Oregon, Idaho, Washington, western Montana and 
western Wyoming (region 9), and obligate wetland 
indicator status in Nevada, Utah, western Colorado, 
California, Arizona and New Mexico (regions 7,8, and 9), 
meaning that it almost always naturally occurs in 
wetlands throughout its native range.  Please consult the 
PLANTS Web site and your State Department of Natural 
Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., threatened 
or endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland 
indicator values). 

Description 
General: Idaho blue-eyed grass is a perennial forb/herb, 
not a grass as the common name suggests.  Part of the iris 
family (Iridaceae), it is a monocot and has thin, erect, 
grass-like leaves growing from the base.  As it matures it 
will grow to be 6 to 18 inches tall, and its small blooms 
are light blue to deep blue or purple, six-petaled, star-
shaped flowers with a yellow center (Cholewa, 2012).  
Flowers will begin to bloom late spring through mid-
summer (Turner & Gustafson, 2006).  Seeds will form in 
round capsules and, when ripe, pods turn tan to dark 
brown or black and begin to split. 

Distribution: The four varieties of this plant are found 
throughout the western half of the United States, from 
northern California and Nevada throughout Oregon and 
Washington into British Columbia, east across northern 
Idaho into western Montana and south into western 
Wyoming and Colorado, eastern Utah, Arizona and 
northern New Mexico.  For current distribution, please 
consult the Plant Profile page for this species on the 
PLANTS Web site. 

Habitat:  Plants are common in moist meadows and on 
the edges of wetlands or stream banks, in a range of mid 
to lower elevations, but mostly in open meadows and 
mountainous forests (Turner & Gustafson, 2006).  This 
species prefers subalpine climates and seasonally moist 
soils like those of the Pacific Northwest. 

Adaptation 

IDAHO  

BLUE-EYED GRASS 
Sisyrinchium idahoense E.P. 

Bicknell 

Plant Symbol = SIID 

Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials 
Center, Oregon 

Photo by Amy Bartow, NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials Center, 2011 

Alternate Names 
There are at least four varieties of Idaho blue-eyed grass 
occurring throughout the species’ range  
(var. idahoense, var. macounii, var. occidentale, var. 
segetum). 

Uses 
Restoration: Sisyrinchium idahoense is a prime candidate 
for wetland or riparian zone restoration sites, such as for 
Wetland Reserve Program (WRP) and Wetland Reserve 
Enhancement Program (WREP) projects.  It attracts 
multiple pollinators and beneficial insects, provides cover 
for small animals, and its clumpy root structure provides 
soil stability.  It grows in full sun to shaded areas and is 
highly desirable because of its productive versatility. 
 
Pollinator habitat: This plant is a highly attractive nectar 
and pollen plant for native bees and other beneficial 
insects.  It is also reported as a nectar source for the 
mardon skipper (Polites mardon), a butterfly listed as 
endangered in the state of Washington, and a candidate 
species for enlistment on the Federal endangered species 
list (Black & Vaughan, 2005). 
 

 

Idaho blue-eyed grass can adapt to fine to coarse soils, 
loamy to clay in texture.  The limiting factor for this 
species is drought.  It will do well in any area where it has 
moist to saturated winter and spring soils.  

Establishment 
Be sure to choose areas that are at least seasonally moist, 
if not swampy, or employ irrigation and the plants will 
grow well.  S. idahoense seeds are dormant and need to 
experience warm, early fall temperatures followed by cold 
winter temperatures to initiate germination in early spring 
as soils warm. Seeds can be shallowly drill planted 
(surface to 1/8 inch) or broadcast at a single species rate 
of 6 to 7 pounds pure live seed (pls) per acre in the fall if 
there is good site preparation and weed control for at least 
the previous year.  There are approximately 380,000 seeds 
per pound, so a rate of one pound per acre will result in 
about 9 seeds per square foot.  However, the preferred 
establishment method for this species is to plant plugs in 
the early spring to establish a competitive advantage over 
aggressive weed species.   

Management 
Once established in appropriate areas, there is little 
maintenance required to keep these plants growing.  
While Idaho blue-eyed grass will self-sow and be prolific, 
it is not aggressive and is unlikely to become dominant in 
most areas.   

Pests and Potential Problems 
No known pests or problems are associated with S. 
idahoense.  

Environmental Concerns 
None. 

Seeds and Plant Production 
Plug Propagation and Field Establishment: It is 
recommended to establish fields from plugs to avoid 
competition from weeds and the need for dry-season 
irrigation during the first years.  Production work done at 
the Corvallis Plant Materials Center indicates that 
transplanting plugs into weed fabric creates cleaner fields 
and results in an established, productive field in the first 
growing season.  To overcome seed dormancy, sow seeds 
in containers and place in a warm location (65°F) for 2-4 
weeks then move containers to a cold location (45°F or 
lower) for at least eight weeks.  Alternately, containers 
can be left outside from early September through 
December.  Move containers to a greenhouse set between 
50-60°F in late December.  Temperatures warmer than 
65°F can halt germination, but greenhouse temperatures 
can be raised after seeds have germinated.  Expect seeds 
to germinate within 2-4 weeks.  Grow in a greenhouse 
and transplant out into fields covered with weed fabric in 
spring on 1 x 1 foot spacing.  Plants are small and do not 
require a large planting distance, so spacing may be 
tailored to the individual producer’s equipment.  It may be 
beneficial to plant on wider row spacing for weed control 

 

 

purposes, especially if weed fabric is not used (not 
recommended).   
This species can also be established by direct sowing 
methods in early fall, but this is not recommended for 
seed production fields.  For direct seeding into a field, 
seeds should be sown at a rate of 60 pls seeds per square 
foot, or 6-7 pounds pls per acre.  Sow as shallowly as 
possible (surface to 1/8 inch) in rows 10-14 inches apart. 
 
Field Management: The recommended use of weed fabric 
for Idaho blue-eyed grass optimizes two production 
objectives: weed exclusion and yield increase.  There are 
no labeled herbicides for use on this forb when in seed 
production, so other methods of weed control become 
very important.  Weed fabric excludes most weeds, but 
hand weeding may be necessary where the soil is exposed 
within the holes in the fabric.  Hand weeding and spot 
spraying are effective weed management tools, and are 
more beneficial when coupled with a carefully selected 
pre-emergent herbicide to create a weed free seed bed.  
Production field borders need to be kept clean using 
herbicides or tillage methods.  Reducing weeds from the 
seed production area will help prevent weed seeds from 
contaminating the seed crop.  A spring application of a 
balanced fertilizer (15-15-15) is recommended for this 
species.  The weed fabric may need to be cut in year two 
to allow for expansion of the plant crowns as they grow in 
the spring.  The field may be mowed again following 
harvest to remove residual material and allow for ease of 
weed treatments.   
 
Harvest Methods: Idaho blue-eyed grass begins flowering 
in May and will continue through July.  Harvest maturity 
may be uneven, but for each plant it is reached when the 
round seed capsules turn light to dark brown and begin to 
split open.  There is a narrow window of time to collect 
seed between capsule ripening and shattering.  As 
capsules open, seed will fall out.  For this reason, it is 
recommended to plant small plots that can be managed by 
hand and harvested daily, or use weed fabric to catch 
shattering seed.  Harvest using a modified swather that is 
able to collect harvested stems and seeds as they are cut, 
instead of leaving it on the ground.  When weed fabric is 
used, fallen seed may be swept or vacuumed after the 
plants are harvested, increasing yields.  If using weed 
fabric, harvest stems as the latest seeds are maturing.  
Seeds that have shattered onto the weed fabric may be 
swept up using a flail-vac seed stripper or vacuumed from 
the fabric.  If weed fabric is not used, harvest the field 
when most seeds are mature, but have not shattered.  
Harvested materials should be laid out to dry completely 
before cleaning.   
 
Seed Cleaning: Blue-eyed grass seeds are round and 
heavy, and cleaning them to purity is relatively easy.  A 
stationary combine or thresher works well to separate 
seed from pods.  Follow with an air-screen machine to 
sort seed from chaff and other organic debris. 

 

This little plant can be very prolific, averaging a seed 
yield of 620 pounds per acre for a mature, solidly-planted 
stand.  Although the plants will flower during the first 
season, first year harvests are usually minimal at around 
10 pounds per acre.  Yields steadily increase in years two 
and three, reaching up to 700 pounds per acre depending 
on harvest method and use of weed fabric.  Plants are 
long-lived and maintain high production beyond five 
years.   

Polites mardon. Red list of pollinator insects of North 
America. CD-ROM Version 1 (May 2005). The 
Xerces Society for Invertebrate Conservation, 
Portland, OR. 

Carr, G.D. Sisyrinchium idahoense. Oregon flora project.  

Available at 
http://www.botany.hawaii.edu/faculty/carr/ofp/ofp_in
dex.htm (accessed 3 May 2012) 

Cholewa, A. 2012. Jepson eFlora (v. 1.0), Sisyrinchium.  

Available at http://ucjeps.berkeley.edu/IJM.html 
(accessed 29 Mar. 2012). Jepson Flora Project, 
Berkeley. 

Turner, M., and P. Gustafson. 2006. Wildflowers of the  

Pacific Northwest. Timber Press, Portland, OR. 

 
Prepared By 
Mary Beuthin  
Corvallis Plant Materials Center, Oregon 

 
Sisyrinchium sp. seeds at the Corvallis Plant Materials Center, Oregon, 
2012. Photo by Robert C Hoffman. 

 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
None, but seed is readily available from commercial 
dealers in the Pacific Northwest. 

References 
Bartow, A. 2012. The 2011 Bureau of Land Management  
annual report: Roseburg district. USDA NRCS Plant 
Materials Center, Corvallis, OR. 

Black, S.H., and D.M. Vaughan. 2005. Species profile:  

Citation 
Beuthin, M. 2012. Plant guide for Idaho blue-eyed grass 
(Sisyrinchium idahoense). USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Plant Materials Center, Corvallis, 
OR. 

Published May 2012 
Edited: 2Apr2012 aym;06Nov2012jab 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

