 
 

 

Plant Guide

floral sources of many oligolectic bees such as 
Andrena hirticincta, A. nubecula, A. placata, A. 
simplex, A. solidaginis, Colletes simulans armatus, 
and Melissoides druriella (Mader et al. 2011).  
Honey bees collect large amounts of nectar from 
goldenrod prior to winter, and other bees use pollen 
from goldenrods to provision late-season nests 
(Mader et al. 2011). 
 
Rangeland revegetation: Missouri goldenrod can be 
used for revegetation of disturbed areas, for 
minespoil reclamation, and soil stabilization (Walsh 
1993). 
 
Forage: This plant has poor forage value, however 
cattle and sheep will graze it in the spring and early 
summer, and deer and antelope will graze the lower 
leaves (Stubbendieck et al. 2003).  The plant may be 
toxic to sheep (Stubbendieck et al. 2003).   
 
Ethnobotanical: Native Americans chewed leaves 
and flowers of this plant to relieve sore throats, and 
chewed roots to relieve toothache (Stubbendieck et 
al. 2003). 
 
Ornamental: Missouri goldenrod is not typically 
planted in a landscaped setting due to its spreading 
rhizomatous growth.  However, it may be possible to 
manage plants by planting in a pot submersed in the 
ground, or by removing new growth each year.  Seed 
dispersal can be controlled by removing flower heads 
prior to seed ripening. 

Status 
Missouri goldenrod is the state flower of Nebraska, 
and is listed as threatened in Michigan.  Consult the 
PLANTS Web site and your State Department of 
Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious 
status, and wetland indicator values). 

Weediness 
Goldenrods have a reputation of being weedy due to 
their rhizomatous growth, which enables them to 
rapidly colonize disturbed sites and causes them to be 
difficult to control.  In stable rangeland 
environments, however, they seldom achieve 
densities that are a problematic (Whitson et al 2004).  
Please consult with your local NRCS Field Office, 
Cooperative Extension Service office, state natural 
resource, or state agriculture department regarding 
this plant’s status and management.   

 

MISSOURI 

GOLDENROD 

Solidago missouriensis Nutt. 

Plant Symbol = SOMI2 

 
Contributed by:  NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Pullman, WA 

 

Solidago missouriensis. Jim Pisarowicz, USDI National 
Park Service 

 

Alternate Names 
Prairie goldenrod, Tolmie’s goldenrod (S. 
missouriensis var. tolmieana)  

Uses 
Pollinator habitat: Solidago species provide vital 
sources of pollen and nectar for bees and other 
insects in the late summer and fall throughout North 
America (Mader et al. 2011).  Insects known to visit 
Solidago species include beneficial solitary wasps 
and pollen-eating beetles such as the soldier beetle 
(Chauliognathus pennsylvanicus) and the black 
blister beetle (Epicauta pennsylvanica).  Goldenrod 
and aster species are believed to be the preferred 

 

Description 
General:  Sunflower family (Asteraceae).  Solidago 
missouriensis is a native, warm-season, short-lived 
perennial.  Stems grow singularly or in group from a 
creeping rhizome or woody caudex.  Stems are 
reddish-green, smooth, slender, erect and are 20 to 90 
cm (8 to 36 in) tall. Leaves are alternate, triple-
nerved and have entire or sparsely serrated edges.  
Basal leaves are oblanceolate, up to 30 cm (12 in) 
long and 3 cm (1 in) wide, and have short petioles. 
Upper leaves are smaller, lance-shaped and sessile.  
Numerous inflorescences form on curved panicle 
branches.  Inflorescences have 7 to 13 yellow disc 
flowers and 8 to 13 yellow ray flowers, and bloom 
July through October.  Seeds are brown cylindrical 
achenes 1 to 2.2 mm (0.04 to 0.09 in) long, are 
smooth or hairy, and have white bristly pappus 2.5 to 
3 mm (0.1 to 0.12 in) long. (Hitchcock and Cronquist 
1973; Nebraska Department of Agriculture 1979; 
Stubbendieck et al. 2003; Burke Museum of Natural 
History and Culture 2011; USDA-NRCS 2011). 
 
The genus name Solidago is from Latin 
solidus/solido (whole) and ago (to make) meaning to 
“make whole or heal”, in reference to the plants’ 
supposed healing properties (Hitchcock and 
Cronquist 1973; Charters 2011). 

Distribution:  This plant is found in most Midwestern 
and western states in the U.S., and in the south-
central and southwest provinces of Canada.  There 
are four varieties:  fasciculata, found throughout 
most of the species’ range; missouriensis, found 
primarily in the western portion of the species’ range; 
tenuissima, found only in Colorado, New Mexico and 
Arizona, and tolmieana, found only in Wasington and 
Oregon. For current distribution of this species and 
varieties, consult the Plant Profile page on the 
PLANTS Web site. 

Habitat:  Missouri goldenrod grows on dry, open 
slopes in upland prairies, plains, meadows, deciduous 
and evergreen forests and deserts, and along 
roadsides, railroads, ditches and fences (Walsh, 1994; 
Stubbendieck et al. 2003).   This species often 
establishes in open, disturbed sites, but is also 
tolerant of partial shade (Wasser 1982, as cited by 
Walsh 1993).  It is considered a mid-seral species in 
northwestern Iowa (Platt 1975, as cited by Walsh 
1993). 

Adaptation 
Missouri goldenrod is adapted to areas receiving 30 
to 90 cm (12 to 35 in) of annual precipitation at 
elevations up to 3,200 m (10,600 ft).  Plants grow 
well in sandy loam to clay loam soils, and poorly in 
gravel and dense clay (Walsh 1993).  Plants are 
tolerant of weakly acidic to moderately basic and 
weakly saline conditions (Wasser 1982, as cited by 
Walsh 1993) and not tolerant of extremely acidic and 

 

 

saline conditions (Dittberner and Olson 1983, as cited 
by Walsh 1993).  Plants in the dormant state are 
adapted to fire (Wasser 1982, as cited by Walsh 
1993).  

 

Solidago missouriensis.  Rod Gilbert, University of 
Washington Burke Herbarium 

Establishment 
Plants can be established by seed, seedlings, or 
rhizomes.  Seed should be planted into a firm, weed-
free seed bed at a rate of 1.1 kg PLS/ha (1 lb PLS/ac) 
and at a depth of 0.3 to 0.6 cm (0.125 to 0.25 in).  If 
planted in a mix, the seeding rate should be adjusted 
according to the proportion of the mix.  The seed 
does not require a cold moist period for optimal 
germination (Skinner 2004) therefore can be planted 
in the spring or fall.  Due to differences in 
environmental conditions however, planting in the 
fall may result in more successful establishment.  In a 
field trial conducted at the Pullman Plant Materials 
Center, Skinner found Missouri goldenrod had 
significantly better establishment when planted in 
early fall (Sept 15) and late fall (Oct 30) compared to 
spring (April 20) (Scheinost et al 2010).   
 
Plants established by seedlings can be started by 
sowing seed in containers in January and placed in a 
greenhouse.  Seed should be covered lightly with soil 
and kept moist until germination.  A layer of pea 
gravel can be applied to the soil surface to prevent 
seeds from floating.  Seeds planted in this manner 

will begin germination about Day 7 and complete 
germination by Day 14 (Skinner 2004).  Plants 
should be moved to a cold-frame in late March or 
early April and hardened off for 2 to 4 weeks prior to 
transplanting into a prepared field site in early May.  
Plants should be spaced 30 to 60 cm (1 to 2 ft) apart. 
 
Plants can also be established by rhizomes.  Sections 
of rhizomes should be collected from cultivated 
plants or approved areas, kept moist during transport, 
and replanted in a prepared field site.   

Management 
This plant spreads by rhizomes and by seed.  Where 
plant spread is not desired, seedlings should be 
planted in a large pot or barrel submersed in the soil, 
or new growth should be cut and removed each year.  
To prevent seed dispersal, flower heads should be 
removed prior to seed ripening.  Plants will withstand 
vigorous cutting, and will regrow if cut during the 
growing season.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
Missouri goldenrod can be damaged by a native leaf 
feeding beetle, Trirhabda canadensis (Skinner 2004). 
 
Environmental Concerns 
This plant may create monotypic stands in some 
habitats, particularly where ground is open and 
disturbed.  To prevent monotypic stands from 
forming, seed Missouri goldenrod at low densities or 
plant in small areas. 
 
Control 
If control of this species is desired, contact your local 
agricultural extension specialist or county weed 
specialist to learn what works best in your area and 
how to use it safely.  Always read label and safety 
instructions for any control method.   

Seeds and Plant Production 
Stands of Missouri goldenrod produce seed crops for 
at least five years (Skinner 2004).  Plants are 
indeterminate, and seed ripens about 6 weeks after 
flowers bloom (Walsh 1993).  Seed is wind-
disseminated and will blow away when ripe.  Seed 
can be harvested with a vacuum, which removes only 
mature seed and minimizes amount of undesired 
plant material (Skinner 2004).  Small amounts of 
seed can be cleaned by rubbing over 10 mm mesh 
screen and using an air column separator to remove 
the pappus.  Larger amounts of seed can be threshed 
with a hammer mill and cleaned with air screen 
equipment (Skinner 2004).  There are about 
2,000,000 seeds per pound (USDA-NRCS 2011).   
 
Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
None, however seed and seedlings are available from 
multiple vendors. 

 

 

References 
Burke Museum of Natural History and Culture.  

[Online]. Available at: 
http://biology.burke.washington.edu/herbarium/i
magecollection.php (accessed 3 Mar 2011). 
University of Washington, Seattle, WA. 

Charters, M.L. 2011.  California Plant Names: Latin 
and Greek Meanings and Derivations. [Online] 
Available at: 
http://www.calflora.net/botanicalnames/  
(accessed 3 Mar 2011).  

Hitchcock, C.L. and A. Cronquist. 1973. Flora of the 

Pacific Northwest. University of Washington 
Press, Seattle and London. 

Mader, E., M. Shepherd, M. Vaughan, S.H. Black 

and G. LeBuhn. 2011. Attracting Native 
Pollinators. The Xerces Society. Storey 
Publishing, North Adams, MA. 

Nebraska Department of Agriculture. 1979.  

Nebraska Weeds. Lincoln, NE. 

Scheinost, P., D. Skinner, M. Stannard. 2010. 

Evaluation of Planting Time and Survivability of 
16 Forb and 2 Grass Species Native to the Inland 
Northwest.  Plant Materials Technical Note 20.  
USDA-NRCS, Pullman, WA. 

Skinner, D. 2004. Propagation protocol for 

production of container Solidago missouriensis 
Nutt. Plants; USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Pullman, WA. In: Native Seed Network. 
[Online] Available at: 
http://nativeplantnetwork.org (Accessed 3 Mar 
2011). University of Idaho, College of Natural 
Resources, Forest Research Nursery, Moscow, 
ID. 

Skinner, D. 2007.  Unpublished data.  
Stubbendieck, J., S.L. Hatch and L.M. Landholt. 

2003. North American Wildland Plants: A Field 
Guide. University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln 
and London. 

Walsh, R.A. 1994. Solidago missouriensis. In: Fire 

Effects Information System, [Online]. Available 
at:  http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/ (accessed 
3 Mar 2011). U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research 
Station, Fire Sciences Laboratory.  

USDA-NRCS. 2011. The PLANTS Database. 

[Online] Available at:http://plants.usda.gov 
(Accessed 3 Mar 2011). National Plant Data 
Center, Baton Rouge, LA 70874-4490 USA 

 
Prepared By 
Pamela L.S. Pavek, USDA NRCS Plant Materials 
Center, Pullman, Washington 

Citation 
Pavek, P.L.S. 2011. Plant guide for Missouri 
goldenrod (Solidago missouriensis). USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service. Pullman, WA. 

Published September 2011 

Edited: 10Aug11plsp; 01Sept11jab 

For more information about this and other plants, 
please contact your local NRCS field office or 
Conservation District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ 
and visit the PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant Materials Program 
Web site http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or 
availability of other Web sites. 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

