 
 

 

Plant Guide

Wetland Reserve Program (WRP) and Wildlife Habitat 
Incentives Program (WHIP) plantings. 
Pollinator habitat: Oregon saxifrage provides an 
important early season nectar source for many native 
pollinator species.   
Ornamental: This species is a resilient, long-lived 
perennial that can add some early spring texture to a 
landscape that contains other later blooming species.  It 
can also be used in places within a landscape where the 
soil is waterlogged throughout the winter and spring 
months.   

Status 
In the Intermountain region and California, Oregon 
saxifrage is considered an obligate wetland species, 
meaning it almost always occurs in wetlands, and in the 
Northwest region it is considered a facultative wetland 
plant that usually occurs in wetlands, but may 
occasionally be found in non-wetlands (USDA-NRCS, 
2012).  Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your 
State Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Description 
General: Oregon saxifrage is a strong perennial that 
comes back from a simple or branched persistent and 
sometimes woody base, or caudex (Hitchcock and 
Cronquist, 1961).  The glandular, densely hairy leaves are 
3-10 inches long and are linear to widely egg shaped, 
tapering to a petiole (leaf stem) of 0-2 inches in length 
(Hitchcock and Cronquist, 1961; Turner and Gustafson, 
2006).  Leaf margins may be entire (smooth) or toothed.  
The 11-47 inch tall flowering stalks have a dense 
covering of hairs, becoming glandular toward the top, and 
are leafless.  The inflorescence is comprised of clusters of 
small white to greenish-white flowers with oval petals.  
The fruit is a capsule-like structure that has multiple 
chambers which contain the tiny, brown seeds.  Plants 
flower from April to August, depending on latitude and 
elevation. 
Distribution:  Oregon saxifrage is found on the west 
slopes of the Cascade Mountains from Whatcom County, 
WA, southward throughout the Willamette Valley and 
Cascade Mountains of Oregon and Northern California, 
into the Sierra Nevada range of California and Nevada 
(Hitchcock and Cronquist, 1961; USDA-NRCS, 2012).  
This species is also found in seasonally wet areas of the 
Rocky Mountains in Alberta, Idaho, Montana, Wyoming, 
and Colorado.  Oregon saxifrage grows from about 300 ft 
in Washington and Oregon to elevations of 3,200 to 8,200 
feet in California and up to 8,800 ft in the Rocky 
Mountains (Burke Herbarium, 2012; Jepson Flora Project, 

OREGON SAXIFRAGE 

Saxifraga oregana Howell 

Plant Symbol = SAOR2 

Contributed by:  USDA NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials 
Center, Oregon 

 

Oregon saxifrage seed increase field at the Corvallis Plant Materials 
Center. Photo by Amy Bartow 

Alternate Names 
Alternate Common names:  bog saxifrage, Oregon bog 
saxifrage, swamp saxifrage, Oregon marsh saxifrage 
Alternate Scientific Names: Micranthes arnoglossa Small, 
Micranthes brachypus Small,Micranthes oregana 
(Howell) Small, Saxifraga montanensis Small, Saxifraga 
oregana Howell var. montanensis (Small) C.L. Hitchc., 
Saxifraga oregana Howell var. sierrae Coville  

Uses 
Restoration: Oregon saxifrage can be planted on 
restoration sites that contain wet areas such as stream 
banks, seasonal wetlands, or vernal pools.  This species is 
used for NRCS Conservation Reserve Program (CRP), 

 

2012).  For current distribution, please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 

Habitat:  Oregon saxifrage is found along stream banks 
and in bogs, marshes, wet prairies, vernal pools and moist 
meadows with seasonally wet soils (Hitchcock and 
Cronquist, 1961; Jepson Flora Project, 2012; Turner and 
Gustafson, 2006).   

Adaptation 
Oregon saxifrage is adapted to grow in most soil types 
with adequate winter and spring moisture.  The plants 
flower in the spring and go dormant by mid-summer to 
cope with dry conditions.  

Establishment 
Seeds are not dormant and will germinate best when 
exposed to late summer/early fall temperatures.  In 
germination trials at the Corvallis Plant Materials Center, 
highest germination occurred after exposure to warm 
temperatures (65°F or above) for two weeks followed by 
cool temperatures (50°F) for 4 weeks.  Seeds should be 
broadcast on the soil surface on sites in the early fall 
while soils are still warm.  Seeds can be sown on 
restoration sites in the fall at a rate of 1 pound per acre, or 
300 seeds per square foot. The seedlings are very small 
and grow slowly, so it may take up to four years before 
they become obvious on the site.   
Establishment may be done with plugs or crown divisions 
if a quicker result is desired.  The caudex of a large plant 
may be divided into ten or more propagules.  They can be 
planted out in spring or fall as long as there is adequate 
soil moisture.  Plugs or crown divisions often flower and 
produce seed in the first year. 

  

 

Oregon Saxifrage growing in its native habitat., Elk Meadows, Mt Hood 
National Forest, Oregon. Photo by Amy Bartow. 

Management 
Periodic mowing, grazing or burning may be necessary to 
keep perennial grasses and shrubs from displacing Oregon 
saxifrage.   

 

 

Pests and Potential Problems 
There is no current information on pests or diseases of 
this species. 

Environmental Concerns 
There are no known environmental concerns associated 
with Oregon saxifrage. 

Seeds and Plant Production 
Field Establishment: Seeds are very small and seedlings 
grow slowly.  For best seed production field 
establishment, sow seeds in containers placed outside in 
early September until germination occurs.  Then move 
containers into a greenhouse to grow throughout the 
winter.  In spring, transplant into a field covered with 
weed fabric containing holes on 1 foot by 1 foot spacing.  
Plants grow vigorously in the cool, wet fall and winter 
months and bloom in early spring.   
Harvest Techniques:  Seed heads ripen unevenly and 
individual stalks may be harvested by hand once the 
majority of the seed is ripe. Seeds are ripe when the seed 
bearing structure turns yellow or brown and the tip starts 
to open.  Generally, once half of the seed structures have 
matured, the whole stalk should be harvested to avoid an 
excessive amount of seed shatter.  Care must be taken 
when cutting the stalks or much of the seed will spill out.  
After each stalk is cut, it needs to remain vertical until it 
is over a tarp or a barrel to prevent the seed from falling 
onto the ground.  For highest yields, vacuum seed from 
the weed fabric once all of the stalks have been harvested.  
Place the harvested stalks on a tarp to dry.   
Seed Cleaning Techniques: Dried seed stalks can be 
threshed or put into a brush machine to remove the seed 
from the plant material.  An air screen machine can be 
used to separate good seed from small pieces of plant 
material, chaff and soil.   
Yield: The yield is highly variable depending on spring 
weather and harvest technique. At the Corvallis Plant 
Materials Center, yields have been between 30 and 100 
pounds per acre.   

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
Seed of this species may be available from native plant 
nurseries from within its range.  Contact your local 
Natural Resource Conservation Service office for more 
information on availability. 

References 
Burke Herbarium. 2012. Micranthes oregana (with 

synonyms). In: Vascular plant database [online]. 
Univ. of Washington, Seattle. 
http://biology.burke.washington.edu/herbarium/collec
tions/vascular/search.php (accessed 8 May 2012). 

Hitchcock, L.C., and A. Cronquist. 1961.  Vascular plants 

of the Pacific Northwest. Part 3: Saxifragaceae to 
Ericaceae. Univ. of Washington Press, Seattle. 

Jepson Flora Project. 2012 (v. 1.0). Jepson eFlora, 
Micranthes oregana, M.S. Park, http://ucjeps. 
berkeley.edu/cgi-bin/get_IJM.pl?tid=33448 (accessed 
8 May 2011). 

Turner, M., and P. Gustafson. 2006. Wildflowers of the 

Pacific Northwest. Timber Press, Inc., Portland, OR.  

Turner, M.  2012.  Oregon Saxifrage.  Turner 

Photographics, Bellingham, WA. Available online at 
http://www.pnwflowers.com/flower/saxifraga-
oregana (accessed 3 May 2012). 

USDA-NRCS. 2012. The PLANTS Database, 

http://plants.usda.gov (accessed 8 May 2012). 
National Plant Data Team, Greensboro, NC. 

Prepared By:   
Tyler C. Ross  
USDA NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials Center, Oregon 

Citation 
Ross, T.C. 2012. Plant guide for Oregon 
saxifrage(Saxifraga oregana). USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Plant Materials Center, Corvallis, 
OR. 
 

Published May 2012 
Edited: 08May2012 aym; 15October2012 jab 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

