 
 

 

Plant Guide

 
Description 
General: Sunflower family (Asteraceae). Last Chance 
Townsendia is a small mound forming perennial forb. The 
plant arises from an underground base and branches to 
form a dense mat from 5 to 10 cm (2 to 4 in) across with 
the flowering heads formed tight against the leafy mound. 
The ray flowers (petals) are yellow to golden on the upper 
surface and purplish and glandular below. The disk 
flowers are yellow. Achenes are small and hairy with a 
short pappus of barbed capillary bristles (Welsh et al. 
2003). The leaves are hairy, 7 to 13 mm (0.25 to 0.43 in) 
long and 1 to 3.5 mm (0.04 to 0.14 in) wide and broadest 
near the tip.  
 
Distribution: 
This species is endemic to a small band about 8 km (5 mi) 
wide and 48 km (30 mi) long in South Central Utah. 
Populations are known from the western edge of the San 
Rafael Swell, west to near Fremont Junction in extreme 
eastern Sevier county and south to Hartnet Draw in 
Wayne County. Small isolated populations are known 
outside of this area of but in close proximity to the main 
population group. In 1993 there were 15 known 
populations with an estimated 6,000 individual plants 
(USDI FWS 1993). Clark and Groebner (2000) reported 
an additional 11 new populations with approximately 650 
total individuals. For current distribution, consult the 
Plant Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Habitat:  
Last Chance Townsendia is known to inhabit saltbush and 
pinyon-juniper plant communities on clay or clay-silt 
exposures of the Mancos, Morrison, Summerville and 
Entrada Formations (USFWS 1993). Species known 
growing in association with Last Chance Townsendia 
include galleta (Hilaria jamesii), blue grama (Bouteloua 
gracillis), black sagebrush (Artemisia nova), shadscale 
(Atriplex confertifolia) and Indian ricegrass (Achnatherum 
hymenoides). Populations occur between 1,800 and 2,400 
m (6,000 to 8,000 ft) in elevation (Clark and Groebner 
2000). 
 
Adaptation 
Last Chance Townsendia grows in soils derived from 
shale lens of the Mancos and other formation with a very 
fine silt texture that are highly saline or sodic. The unique 
soil characteristics create small islands of habitable space 
in vast areas of otherwise uninhabitable soils. These soil 
conditions have produced habitat for several other 
endemic plant species growing in the same range as Last 
Chance Townsendia including Pediocactus despainii, 
Sclerocactus wrightiae, Schoenocrambe barnebyi, 

LAST CHANCE 
TOWNSENDIA 

Townsendia aprica S.L. Welsh & 

Reveal 

Plant Symbol = TOAP 
 
Contributed by: USDA NRCS Idaho Plant Materials 
Program 
 

 

Figure 1. Last Chance Townsendia (Townsendia aprica). Photo by 
Megan Robinson. Used with permission. 

Alternate Names 
Last Chance Townsend daisy 
 
Uses 
Last Chance Townsendia is a recently discovered forb of 
extremely limited distribution. It has no known human or 
wildlife associated uses. 
 
Status 
Last Chance Townsendia was listed as a threatened 
species on August 21, 1985 (USDI FWS 1985). It has 
been given a recovery priority of 5C indicating a high 
degree of threat and a low recovery potential (USDI FWS 
1993).  
 
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State Department 
of Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values). 

 

 

Pediocactus winkleri, Gilia caespitosa and Gilia tenuis. 
All of these species are either listed as federally 
endangered or as candidate species (USFWS 1993). 
 
Establishment 
Last Chance Townsendia has been propagated and grown 
to flower and seed under greenhouse conditions (CPC 
2010); however no propagation protocols are available. 
 
Management 
The severely limited distribution and range of Last 
Chance Townsendia make it highly vulnerable to a variety 
of threats. Genetic analysis revealed bottlenecks in more 
than half of the populations of Last Chance Townsendia 
(Jennings, 2000). The loss of any population would thus 
be severely detrimental to the overall health of the 
species. The greatest current threats come from mineral 
and energy development, road building and livestock 
trampling (USFWS 1993). Most of the federally owned 
habitat of Last Chance Townsendia is or has been under 
lease for coal or oil and gas production (USFWS 1993).  
 
Current management strategies for Last Chance 
Townsendia focus on regulating and managing mineral 
development activities, developing off-road vehicle use 
plans and managing livestock use of currently occupied 
Townsendia habitat (USFWS 1993).  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
There are no known pests or potential problems 
associated with Last Chance Townsendia. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
There are no known environmental concerns associated 
with Last Chance Townsendia. 
 
Seed and Plant Production 
Flowering takes place from April to May with fruit and 
seed ripening occurring from May to June. This species is 
primarily self-incompatible with outcrossing being the 
primary means of reproduction (Tepedino et al. 2004). 
Several native solitary bees have been found to be 
important pollinators. Multiple species of bees in the 
genus Osmia and the ground-nesting Synhalonia 
fulvitarsis were observed as the primary visitors to Last 
Chance Townsendia flowers (Tepedino et al. 2004). 
 
References 
Center for Plant Conservation. 2010. Townsendia aprica, 

plant profile. [Online]. Available at 
http://www.centerforplantconservation.org/collection
/cpc_viewprofile.asp?CPCNum=4300 (accessed 8 
Apr 2010). Missouri Botanical Garden, St. Louis 
(MO. 

Clark, D.J., Groebner, C.M. 2000. Determining Habitat 
Potential and Surveying for Nine Rare Plant Species 
in South-Central Utah. Southwestern rare and 

endangered plants: proceedings of the third 
conference; September 25-28; Flagstaff, AZ. In: 
Maschinski, Joyce; Holter, Louella, editors. 2000. 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Rocky Mountain Research Station. Fort Collins, CO 
(Proceedings RMRS-P-23). p 38-43. 

Jennings, L. 2000. Genetic variation and ecological 

differentiation between two southern Utah endemics: 
U.S. federally threatened Townsendia aprica and a 
closely related congener, T. jonesii var. lutea. 
Master’s Thesis. University of British Columbia, 
Canada. 

Tepedino, V.J., Sipes, S.D., Griswold, T.L. 2004. 

Reproductive biology of a rare spring composite of 
the Colorado Plateau: Townsendia aprica. Western 
North American Naturalist. 64(4): 465-470. 

USDI Fish and Wildlife Service. 1985. Endangered and 

threatened wildlife and plants: rule to determine 
Townsendia aprica (Last Chance Townsendia) to be 
a threatened species. Federal Register. 50 (162): 
33734-33737. 

USDI Fish and Wildlife Service. 1993. Last Chance 

Townsendia (Townsendia aprica) recovery plan. U.S. 
Fish and Wildlife Service, Denver, CO. 18 pp. 
Welsh, S.L., N.D. Atwood, S. Goodrich, and L.C. 

Higgins. 2003. A Utah Flora. Third Edition, revised. 
Brigham Young University, Provo, UT. 

 
Prepared By 
Derek Tilley; USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho. 
 
Loren St. John, USDA NRCS Plant Materials Center, 
Aberdeen, Idaho. 
 
Dan Ogle, USDA NRCS State Office, Boise, Idaho. 
 
Citation 
Tilley, D., St. John, L. and D. Ogle. 2010. Plant guide for 
Last Chance Townsendia (Townsendia aprica). USDA-
Natural Resources Conservation Service, Idaho Plant 
Materials Center. Aberdeen, ID. 
 
Published:  November 2010 
 
Edited: 12Apr2010 djt; 12Apr2010dgo; 12Apr2010lsj 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

