 
 

 

Plant Guide

Well-established medusahead communities have low 
plant species diversity and have low value for wildlife 
habitat (Miller et al. 1999). Rabbits will graze 
medusahead (Sharp et al. 1957). Bodurtha et al. (1989) 
reported that mule deer will frequent medusahead mixed 
communities but they will not eat medusahead. Savage et 
al. (1969) reported that chucker partridge consumed 
medusahead seeds in a controlled feeding study but 
further reported that the birds lost weight.  
 
Status  
Consult the PLANTS Web site and your State Department 
of Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e.g., 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).  
 
Weediness  
Medusahead originates from Eurasia and was first 
reported in North America in the 1880s (Furbush 1953). 
By 2003, it occupied approximately 2.3 million acres in 
17 western states (Rice, 2005). Pellant and Hall (1994) 
suggest that 76 million acres of public land is susceptible 
to invasion by winter annuals including cheatgrass 
(Bromus tectorum ) and medusahead.  
 
Medusahead’s success is largely a result of it being native 
to a Eurasian region with similar temperature-moisture 
patterns as found in the Intermountain West and inland 
valleys of California. Summers are warm and dry; fall, 
winter, and spring seasons are cool to cold and moist.  
 
Diverse native plant communities inhibit colonization of 
weedy species because these communities more fully 
exploit soil and moisture resources. Medusahead typically 
colonizes sites where the existing perennial vegetation has 
been destroyed or weakened (Miller et al. 1999). 
However, they also reported that medusahead will 
colonize native communities but not overrun them until a 
disturbance frees up resources.  
 
Grazing practices can be tied to the success of 
medusahead. However, eliminating grazing will not 
eradicate medusahead if it is already present (Wagner et 
al. 2001). Sheley and Svejcar (2009) reported that even 
moderate defoliation of bluebunch wheatgrass resulted in 
increased medusahead density. They suggested that 
disturbances, such as plant defoliation, limit soil resource 
capture, which creates an opportunity for exploitation by 
medusahead. Avoidance of medusahead by grazing 
animals allows medusahead populations to expand. This 
creates seed reserves that can infest adjoining areas and 
cause changes to the fire regime.  
Transition from a perennial rangeland community to a 
cheatgrass dominated community has greatly contributed 

 

MEDUSAHEAD 

Taeniatherum caput-medusae  

(L.) Nevski 
Plant symbol = TACA8 

 Contributed By: USDA, NRCS, Washington & Idaho 
Plant Materials Program 

 Caution: This plant is highly invasive.  
 
Alternate Names 
Medusahead wildrye, medusahead rye, rough 
medusahead.  
 
Uses  
Erosion Control: Medusahead is a winter annual grass 
with a shallow root system. It is a very poor erosion 
control plant.  
 
Livestock: Medusahead has minimal value for livestock 
grazing (Sharp and Teasdale 1952, Turner 1965, Davies 
and Johnson 2008). Hironaka (1961) reported that grazing 
capacities were reduced as much as 80 percent when 
medusahead was present. Despite these facts, livestock 
will graze medusahead when it is in a vegetative stage 
(Lusk et al. 1961, Horton 1991).  
 
The nutritive value of medusahead foliage is comparable 
to cheatgrass except medusahead has a high level of silica 
and the season of use is much shorter. Horton (1991) 
proposed that the high silica level deterred grazing. 
Grazing values diminish rapidly as the plants mature 
(Furbush 1953), and is due in part to the awned seeds. 
The awned seeds can cause injury to eyes, nose, and 
mouths of grazers (Rice 2005).  
Wildlife:  

 

to the success of medusahead. Young et al. (1999) 
reported that medusahead matures 2-4 weeks later than 
cheatgrass, and medusahead will replace cheatgrass on 
soils that have available moisture after the cheatgrass has 
matured.  
 
Medusahead, like cheatgrass, is a fire-adapted species 
(Davies and Johnson 2008). Both species being winter 
annuals complete their lifecycle prior to the normal 
wildfire season. Medusahead biomass is high in silica, 
degrades slowly, and is highly flammable (McKell et al 
1962). Fast burning fires may not generate enough heat to 
kill seeds lying under the soil surface.  
 
Elimination of the shrub component and surface litter by 
fire exposes bare soil, which is less hospitable to native 
plant seedlings (Young et al. 1999). Medusahead is a very 
effective colonizer of fire-denuded soil.  
 
Activities such as road building expose bare soil and 
heavy subsoil. Failure to revegetate exposed soils leaves 
them prone to medusahead colonization and serves as 
seed source for adjacent areas.  
 
Medusahead alters the nutrient cycling processes from a 
“conservative” cycle to a “leaky” cycle (Norton et al. 
2007). Conservative nutrient cycles allow for rapid 
recovery of nutrients by diverse plant communities. Leaky 
nutrient cycles occur when there is a large pulse of 
nutrients released into the soil and not captured by the 
plants. Leaky nutrient cycling favors medusahead and 
greatly impedes establishment of perennial plant 
communities (Norton et al. 2007).  
 
Description  
General: Grass family (Poaceae). Medusahead 
(Taeniatherum caput-medusae ) is a winter annual grass. 
It is typically 0.15-0.5m (6-20 in) tall and has distinct 
bristly seed heads.  
 
Medusahead germinates in the fall, overwinters as a 
seedling, and commences growth in the spring. The leaves 
of seedlings are bright green, upright, and delicate looking 
(Miller et al. 1999).  
 
One or more stems arise from the base of the plant and 
can be as long as 0.6m but are more commonly 0.2-0.33m 
in length. Each stem produces a single, short (15-50mm 
long), bristly, spike-type seed head. The seed heads are 
similar in appearance to foxtail barley (Hordeum jubatum 
) and bottlebrush squirreltail (Elymus elymoides), but 
medusahead seed heads do not disarticulate. The seed 
heads have 2 sets of bristles; the shorter bristles (20-
40mm) protrude at a wide angle to the spike; and longer 
bristles (40-80mm) are more upright.  
 
Each seed head is a spike inflorescence, each node will 
produce 2-3 spikelets, and each spikelet will contain one 

 

 

viable seed. Twenty or more seeds are produced per seed 
head (Clausnitzer 1996).  
 
Medusahead seed heads and leaf litter degrade slowly and 
commonly accumulate on the ground and make it easy to 
identify infestations.  
 
Distribution: Medusahead is distributed from Washington 
to Montana and south to California. It also occurs in 
Pennsylvania, New York, and Connecticut.  
 
Medusahead is very prominent in the inland valleys of 
California, Intermountain West including the Great Basin, 
and is becoming prominent in the Columbia Basin.  
 
For current distribution, consult the Plant profile page for 
this species on the PLANTS Web site.  
 
Adaptation  
Medusahead is mostly found in degraded ecological sites 
that have relatively high water holding capacity and/or a 
high water table. It frequently replaces cheatgrass on 
heavier clayey soils. It is not common in hot desert 
environments, high mountains where the snowpack lasts 
well into the growing season and areas that receive ample 
summer moisture. Medusahead’s lower moisture limit is 
10-inches MAP, but it is most common in the 12-20-inch 
MAP areas.  
 
Establishment  
It is not recommended for seeding due to its very invasive 
traits.  
 
Control  
Prevention & Containment: Medusahead is slow to 
invade late seral (good or better condition) rangeland that 
has a low disturbance regime (Miller et al. 1999, Davies 
and Svejcar 2008). It commonly follows cheatgrass and 
replaces cheatgrass on heavy soils (Young et al. 1999). 
Maintaining a plant community that exploits resources 
will impede medusahead invasion. For example, 
established pastures must be seeded to species that 
compete well with medusahead for available resources 
and be properly managed. Rangeland communities must 
be managed for high species diversity and be given ample 
time for recovery between grazing periods.  
 
Medusahead seeds drop within 2m of the plant, which 
affords an opportunity to use vegetative buffers to contain 
medusahead (Davies 2008). Tall grasses and shrubs are 
excellent barriers and could greatly reduce movement 
from roadside environments to adjoining land.  
 
Bio-control: There currently are no biological control 
agents developed for this species. Two smut diseases and 
a crown rot have been investigated but do not appear to be 
viable tools (Miller et al 1999, Coombs et al. 2005)  
Chemical: Several herbicides provide excellent control of 
medusahead. Herbicides differ in selectivity, persistence 

in the environment, grazing restrictions, and many other 
parameters. Always read the label before applying any 
herbicide.  
 
Foliar active compounds such as glyphosate (trade name: 
Roundup ™ herbicide, etc.) can be very effective if good 
coverage is obtained. Applications of foliar active 
herbicides will be less effective if a heavy thatch 
intercepts the spray. Soil active compounds such as 
atrazine (trade name: AAtrex™, etc.) and metribuzin 
(trade name: Sencor™, etc.) can also be very effective.  
 
Aminopyralid (trade name: MilestoneMedushead™) and 
imazapic (trade name: Plateautm™) are two relatively 
new compounds on the market that provide foliar control 
and several months of soil activity.  
 
Mechanical: Medusahead is susceptible to tillage. 
Effective tillage must sever the roots before the plants 
flower thus preventing seed production. Medusahead can 
have multiple flushes. Consequently, multiple tillage 
operations and/or tillage plus other control techniques 
need to be employed for effective control.  
 
Range scalping and chiseling do not provide adequate 
undercutting of the roots. Desirable range species 
stimulated by these practices are too slow growing to out-
compete medusahead. Mowing must be low enough to 
remove the seed heads.  
 
Burning: Mature medusahead is very flammable. Fire can 
remove the thatch layer, consume standing vegetation, 
and even reduce seed levels. Furbush (1953) reported that 
timing a burn while the seeds were in the milk stage 
effectively reduced medusahead the following year. He 
further reported that adjacent unburned areas became a 
seed source for reinvasion the following year.  
 
Fire by itself is an ineffective control practice. Fire 
eliminates competing vegetation, accelerates loss of top 
soil, and frees up nutrients. Fire is an excellent tool in 
combination with other control practices such as 
application of herbicides.  
 
Revegetation: Revegetation is a risky process. 
Precipitation events must be timely and sufficient during 
the revegetation establishment year. Medusahead seeds 
germinate in the fall while most perennial grasses 
germinate in the spring. This gives medusahead a clear 
advantage in the spring. Revegetation species must be 
able to establish quickly and must be capable of 
withstanding summer drought. Once fully established, 
revegetation species must be capable of withstanding fire 
and defoliation.  
 

 

 

Seedling growth of intermountain perennial and 
weedy annual grasses. J. Range Manage 51:584-589.  

Few species have consistently demonstrated the ability to 
establish in medusahead sites. Bluebunch wheatgrass 
seedlings grow far too slowly (Goebel et al. 1988). 
Crested wheatgrass performs poorly on clay soils (Young 
et al. 1999). Bottlebrush squirreltail has exhibited the 
ability to replace medusahead (Hironaka and Sindelar 
1975, Arrendondo et al. 1998). ‘Sherman’ big bluegrass 
performed well in revegetation trials (Young et al. 1999). 
They further reported that additional trials were needed to 
confirm their results.  
 
When practical, one year of fallow should be employed to 
control existing medusahead plants and reduce the soil 
seed bank. Failure to control medusahead when 
revegetating will result in failure.  
 
Cultural Practices: Vehicles, clothing, camp gear, and 
pets should be cleaned of adhering seed after driving, 
camping, and walking in medusahead-infested areas. 
Livestock should not be moved from infested pastures to 
fields free of medusahead. Excessive roadside and 
rangeland disturbance should be avoided. 
 
References  
Arrendondo, J.T., T.A. Jones, and D.A. Johnson. 1998. 
 
 
Bodurtha, T.S., J.P. Peek, J.L. Lauer. 1989. Mule deer 
 
habitat use related to succession in a bunchgrass 
 
community. J Wildl Manage 53:314-319.  
Clausnitzer, D. 1996. Field study of competition between 
 
 
 
 
 
Coombs, E. M., J.K. Clark, G.L. Piper. 2004. 
  Medusahead ryegrass. In: Coombs, E. M., J.K. Clark, 
 
 
 
Davies, K.W. 2008. Medusahead dispersal and 
 
 
Davies, K.W. and D.D. Johnson. 2008. Managing 
 
 
Furbush, P. 1953. Control of medusahead on California 
 
Goebel, C.J., M. Tazl, and G.A. Harris. 1988. Secar 
 
 
Hironaka, M. 1961. The relative rate of root development 
 
 
Hironaka, M. amd B.W. Sindelar. 1975. Growth 
 
 
 

medusahead ( Taeniatherum caput-medusae subsp. 
asperum [Simk.] Melderis) and squirreltail (Elymus 
elymoides [Raf.] Swezey). M.S. Thesis, Dept 
Rangeland Resources, Oregon State University, 
Corvallis, OR.  

G.L. Piper (eds.). Biological control of invasive 
plants in the United States. Oregon State University 
Press, Corvallis, OR.  

establishment in sagebrusk steppe plant communities. 
Rangeland Ecol Manage 61:110-115.  

medusahead in the Intermountain West is at a critical 
threshold. Rangelands 30:13-15.  

ranges. J Forest 51:118-121.  

bluebunch wheatgrass as a competitor to 
medusahead. J Range Manage 41:88-89.  

of cheatgrass and medusahead. J Range Manage 
14:263-267.  

characteristics of squirreltail seedlings in competition 
with medusahead. J Range Manage 28:283-285.  

 

weeds. Westview press. Boulder, CO.  

OR.  

1961. Medusahead palatability. J Range Manage 
14:248-251.  

Horton, W.H. 1991. Medusahead: importance,  
 
distribution, and control. In: James, L.F. J.O. Evans, 
  M.H. Ralphs and R.D. Child (eds.). Noxious range 
 
Lusk, W.C., M.B. Jones, P.J. Torell, and C.M. McKell. 
 
 
McKell, C.M., A.M. Wilson, and B.L. Kay. 1962. 
Effective burning of rangelands infested with 
 
 
medusahead. Weeds 10:125-131.  
Miller, H.C., D. Clausnitzer, and M.M Borman. 1999. 
  Medusahead. In: Sheley, R.L. and J.K. Petroff (eds.). 
 
Biology and Management of Noxious Rangeland 
  Weeds. Oregon State University Press, Corvallis, 
 
Norton, J.B., T.A. Monaco, and U. Norton. 2007. 
  Mediterranean annual grasses in western North 
 
America: kids in a candy store. Plant Soil 298:1-5.  
Pellant, M. and C. Hall. 1994. Distribution of two exotic 
 
grasses in intermountain rangelands: ststus in 1992. 
In: Monsen, S.B. and S.G. Kitchen (eds.). Proc. 
 
Ecology and management of annual rangelands. 
 
USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech Report INT-GTR-
 
 
313. Ogden, UT.  
Rice, P.M. 2005. Medusahead [Taeniatherum caput-
medusae (L.) Nevski]. In: Duncan, C.L. and J.K. 
 
Clark (eds.) Invasive plants of range and wildlands 
 
and their environmental, economic, and societal 
 
 
impacts. Weed Sci Soc America. Lawrence, KS.  
Savage, D.E., J.A. Young, and R.A. Evans. 1969. 
Utilization of medusahead and downy brome 
 
caryopses by chukar partridges. J Wildl Manage 
 
 
33:975-978.  
Sharp L.A. and E.W. Teasdale. 1952. Medusahead, a 
 
  Wildlife, and Range Exp. Sta. U. Idaho, Moscow, ID.  
Sharp, L.A., M. Hironaka, and E.W. Teasdale. 1957. 
 
 
Sheley, R.L. and T.J. Svejcar. 2009. Reponse of 
bluebunch wheatgrass and medusahead to 
 
 
defoliation. Rangeland Ecol Manage 62:278-283.  
Turner, R.B. 1965. Medusahead control and management 
 
 
  Management, Portland, Oregon.  
Wagner, J.A., R.E. Delmas, and J.A. Young. 2001. 30 
 
 
Young J.A., C.D. Clements, and G. Nader. 1999. 
  Medusahead and clay: the rarity of perennial seedling 
 

Viability of medusa-head (Elymus caput-medusae L.) 
seed collected in Idaho. J Range Manage 10:123-126.  

years of medusahead: return to fly blown-flat. 
Rangelands 23:6-9.  

problem on some Idaho ranges. Res. Note(3) Forest, 

studies in Oregon. In: Proc. of the cheatgrass 
symposium, Vale, Oregon. Bureau Land 

establishment. Rangelands 21:19-23 

.  

 

Prepared By  
Mark Stannard, Manager, USDA, NRCS, Plant Materials 
Center, Pullman, Washington  
 
Daniel G. Ogle, Plant Materials Specialist, USDA, 
NRCS, Boise, Idaho  
 
Loren St. John, Manager, USDA, NRCS, Plant Materials 
Center, Aberdeen, Idaho 
 
Citation  
M.E. Stannard, D.O. Ogle, and L. St. John. 2010. Plant 
guide for medusahead (Taeniatherum caput-medusae 

Published August, 2010 

Edited: 02Mar2010 ms, 09jun2010 dgo, 02Mar2010 lsj, 
08Jun201010 mes, 09jun2010 jab, 12Jul2010 ljtg 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

