CRIMSON CLOVER 
Trifolium incarnatum L. 

Plant Symbol = TRIN3 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials 
Center, Oregon 

© G.D. Carr, 2006, courtesy of Burke Museum  
of Natural History, University of Washington 

 

Alternate Names 
Alternate Common Names: scarlet clover, Italian clover, 
German clover, French clover, carnation clover, incarnate 
clover 
Alternate Scientific Names: Synonyms for Trifolium 
incarnatum var. incarnatum include: Trifolium 
incarnatum L. var. elatius Gibelli & Belli, Trifolium 
incarnatum L. var. sativum Ducommun, Trifolium 
stellatum L. ssp. incarnatum (L.) Gibelli & Belli, and 
Trifolium stellatum L. var. elatius Gibelli & Belli.   
Synonyms for Trifolium incarnatum var. molinerii 
include: Trifolium incarnatum ssp. molinerii (Balb. ex 
Hornem.) Syme, Trifolium molinerii Balb. ex Hornem., 
Trifolium stellatum subvar. stramineum (C. Presl) Gibelli 
& Belli, and Trifolium stramineum C. Presl. 

 

 

 

Plant Guide

Uses  
Cover crop: Crimson clover is commonly used as a 
winter or summer annual cover crop in rotation with 
vegetables or field crops (Clark, 2007).  It can be used 
alone or as part of a mixture with other legumes, small 
grains, and winter annual grasses.  Species commonly 
used in mixes with crimson clover include vetches (Vicia 
spp.), subclover (Trifolium subterraneum), red clover 
(Trifolium pratense), black medick (Medicago lupulina), 
oats (Avena sativa), cereal rye (Secale cereale), and 
annual ryegrass (Lolium perenne ssp. multiflorum).  It is 
also used as a winter annual reseeding cover crop between 
rows in vineyards, berries, and fruit and nut orchards.  A 
case study in West Virginia showed that a corn silage 
crop was more profitable (10% savings) when preceded 
by an incorporated crimson clover cover crop than when 
side-dressed with a solution of urea and ammonium 
nitrate (UAN) at the standard rate of 120 lb/acre 
(Wickline and Rayburn, 2008).  Given sufficient soil 
moisture, crimson clover can also be interseeded with 
corn and cotton or vegetable crops such as cantaloupe 
right after the last cultivation (Westgate, 1913).  
Green manure: Crimson clover makes an excellent weed-
suppressing green manure crop, adding 70 to 150 lb 
N/acre as a winter annual if it is allowed to reach the late 
bloom stage before being killed or turned under (Ball and 
Lacefield, 2000; Clark, 2007).  Mutch and Martin (2010) 
found that as a summer annual in lower Michigan, 
crimson clover produced ¾ to 1 ton dry matter and 50 to 
60 lb N/acre by late November (as cited in Clark, 2007).  
At least three weeks should be allowed between green 
manure crop termination and planting another crop to 
allow residue to break down and soil microbial 
communities to stabilize. 
Forage, silage, and hay: Crimson clover is reportedly 
“among the most widely planted annual forage legumes in 
the United States” (Ball and Lacefield, 2000).  It has been 
a popular winter pasture crop in the South since the 
1940’s due to its good growth under cool temperatures 
and its ability to produce a substantial seed crop if 
livestock are removed six to eight weeks prior to 
flowering (Hollowell, 1951).  Crimson clover also 
produces high yields of good quality hay when harvested 
at or before the mid-bloom stage.  A good stand can yield 
1 to 2½ tons dry matter per acre, while mixtures with 
winter annual grasses generally yield much higher (Ball 
and Lacefield, 2000; Hollowell, 1951).  When overseeded 
on warm season grasses, crimson clover provides 60 to 
100 pounds or more N per acre to the grass, even if 
grazed or hayed (Ball and Lacefield, 2000). 
Livestock: Crimson clover forage is highly nutritious, with 
over 25% crude protein that can be 80% digestible in 

early spring growth, and may contain 12 to 14% crude 
protein and 60 to 65% digestible nutrients on a dry matter 
basis even at full bloom (Ball and Lacefield, 2000; 
Harper, 2004).  Although bloat is much less likely in 
animals grazing crimson clover than white clover or 
alfalfa, it should generally be used in mixtures with 
grasses to reduce this risk (Knight, 1985).  The barbed 
hairs on overly-mature crimson clover flower heads can 
be problematic for horses, but can be avoided by 
harvesting hay promptly when it begins to bloom. 
Beneficial insect habitat: The flowers produce abundant 
nectar and pollen that attract European honey bees, as 
well as a wide variety of native bees.  Honey bees make a 
light, good quality honey from the nectar.  The flowers 
also harbor minute pirate bug (Orius tristicolor), a 
beneficial insect that feeds on many agricultural pest 
species, including thrips (UC SAREP, 2012). 
Wildlife: Crimson clover can be an important component 
of cool-season forage plots managed for turkeys and 
white-tailed deer, either alone or in a mixture with small 
grains such as oats, rye or wheat, and other legumes such 
as arrowleaf clover (Trifolium vesiculosum) and Austrian 
winter pea (Pisum sativum) (Harper, 2004).  It can also be 
planted as reseeding cool-season forage in firebreaks near 
wildlife plots as part of a mixture with Austrian winter 
pea and wheat. 
Roadside erosion control and beautification: In the 
southeastern United States, crimson clover is planted 
along highways or roadsides to provide quick cover for 
erosion control, stabilization, and beautification. 
Seed crop: Crimson clover is a major seed crop in the 
Willamette Valley of western Oregon, accounting for 
95% of the total US seed production and totaling $2.5 
million in sales in 2010 (Oregon State University, 2011).   

Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s current 
status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, state 
noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Weediness 
This plant may become weedy or invasive in some 
regions or habitats and may displace desirable vegetation 
if not properly managed.  Please consult with your local 
NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service 
office, state natural resource, or state agriculture 
department regarding its status and use.  Weed 
information is also available from the PLANTS Web site 
at http://plants.usda.gov/.  Please consult the Related Web 
Sites on the Plant Profile for this species for further 
information. 

Description 
General: Crimson clover is an annual in the legume 
family (Fabaceae).  Plants are generally densely hairy 
with a rosette of upright, usually unbranched stems 

 

 

reaching 1 to 3 feet tall supported by a central taproot and 
many fibrous roots.  The trifoliate leaves growing along 
the stems have egg- to heart-shaped leaflets that are 
nearly ½ to 1 inch long and are distinguished from the 
leaves of red clover (T. pratense) by their rounded tips 
and absence of V-shaped leaf marks (Burke Museum of 
Natural History and Culture, 2012; Knight, 1985; Vincent 
and Isely, 2012).  The cylindrical or conic flower heads at 
the ends of the stems are about 1 to 2½ inches long and 
contain many small (about ½ inch long) bright scarlet (or 
occasionally white) florets that open in succession from 
the bottom to the top of the flower head.  Flowering is 
induced by day lengths over 12 hours, and plants bloom 
between April and August, depending on the climate and 
region (UC SAREP, 2012).  Flowers are generally self-
fertile but not self-pollinating (about 68 to 75% out-
crossing), relying instead on bees that visit the flowers for 
nectar and pollen (Hollowell, 1951; Knight, 1985).  The 
yellow seeds borne singly in small pods are larger and 
more rounded than red clover seeds.  Crimson clover has 
approximately 120,000 to 150,000 seeds per pound 
(Hollowell, 1951; Whyte et al., 1953). 

Trifolium incarnatum L. a) habit, b) pod, c) pistil, d) staminal column 
and free stamen, e) keel, f) wing, g) flower, h) inflorescence, i) leaf, j) 
seed.  Reprinted with permission of ASA-CSSA-SSSA Publishers, p. 59. 

 

Distribution: Crimson clover is native to southeastern 
Europe and southwestern Asia Minor, and was introduced 
to the United States as a cultivated crop in the 1800’s 
(Hollowell, 1951).  It is now grown widely as a winter 
annual in the Southeast from Kentucky southward and 
from eastern Texas to the Atlantic Coast (USDA 
Hardiness Zones 6–9) (Ball and Lacefield, 2000; Clark, 

2007).  It is also grown as a winter annual in the Pacific 
Northwest and California, and as a summer annual in the 
extreme northern US and parts of Canada (Hardiness 
Zones 3–4).  There are naturalized populations of crimson 
clover in the southeastern and temperate western United 
States (Vincent and Isely, 2012).  For current distribution, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species on 
the PLANTS Web site. 
Habitat:  Naturalized populations of crimson clover can 
be found in moist to dry sites along roadsides, and in 
fields, pastures, and disturbed areas from lowlands to 
montane zones (Douglas et al., 1999). 

Adaptation 
Crimson clover grows best on well-drained, fertile, loamy 
soils, and is adapted to sandy to clayey soils of moderate 
acidity (pH 5.5 to 7.0); it does not grow well on poorly-
drained or highly alkaline soils (Clark, 2007; Knight, 
1985).  This species tolerates more acidity than white and 
red clover (Whyte, 1953).  Once established, it produces 
more biomass at lower temperatures than most other 
clover species (Hollowell, 1951). 

Establishment 
If sowing in a location where crimson clover has not been 
grown in the last three years, seed should be inoculated 
(use inoculant type “R”, Rhizobium leguminosarum 
biovar trifolii) immediately before sowing for best stand 
establishment and root nodulation (Harper, 2004).  Soil 
testing prior to sowing is important, particularly for 
phosphorus and potassium levels, which may limit N 
fixation and stand productivity if they are too low.  Boron 
may also be limiting if reseeding is desired, especially on 
sandy soils, and lime is often needed to adjust the soil pH 
(Ball and Lacefield, 2000).  Nitrogen fertilizer is 
generally not needed as these legumes are able to obtain 
sufficient N from symbiotic N fixation, and excess N 
levels may actually inhibit nodule formation (Gardner et 
al., 1983).  Consult your local extension service for 
recommended fertilizer types and rates. 
As a winter annual, crimson clover is seeded from 
summer to late fall depending on region and intended use.  
It is generally recommended to plant six to eight weeks 
before the average first frost date (Clark, 2007), although 
research at Mississippi State University showed highest 
yields for crimson clover planted August 15 (Knight, 
1985).  For summer annual plantings in northern regions, 
sow in late May or early June as soon as all danger of 
frost has passed for a fall hay harvest, rotation with fall 
vegetables, or overseeding of corn (Clark, 2007; 
Westgate, 1913). 
Seed should be planted at a depth of no more than ¼ inch 
in clay soils and ½ to ¾ inch in sandy soils (Hollowell, 
1951).  In a well-prepared seedbed, drill at a single 
species rate of 15 to 18 pounds pure live seed (PLS) per 
acre, or broadcast at 22 to 30 lb PLS/acre (Clark, 2007).  
For mixtures, sow crimson clover at about two-thirds the 
normal rate and companion crops at one-third to one-half 

 

 

their single species rate, or no more than 90 lb/acre for 
small grains and 15 to 20 lb/acre annual ryegrass (Ball 
and Lacefield, 2000; Clark, 2007).  Seedlings generally 
emerge within 7 days given proper soil moisture and 
optimum germination temperature of 70°F (Johnson et al., 
2007). 
Crimson clover can also be seeded into existing pastures 
or hayfields of warm season perennial grasses such as 
bermudagrass (Cynodon dactylon), dallisgrass (Paspalum 
dilatatum), Johnsongrass (Sorghum halepense), and 
broad-leafed bahiagrass (Paspalum notatum) if the 
grasses are burned, grazed, or mowed short just prior to 
sowing (Hollowell, 1951).  The clover should be seeded 
into summer sod around the time of the first killing frost 
(Ball and Lacefield, 2000).  Seed can be broadcast or 
drilled to a shallow depth; if broadcast, a light disking or 
heavy stocking with livestock after seeding may improve 
seed-to-soil contact and establishment. 

Management 
Livestock/Grazing: If seeded with winter annual grasses, 
initial growth should be monitored closely and grazed 
appropriately to keep the grasses from shading out the 
clover.  In general, crimson clover should not be grazed 
until the plants are 4 to 6 inches tall, and grazing should 
leave at least 3 inches of stubble (Ball and Lacefield, 
2000).  However, leaving too much foliage may increase 
the occurrence of crown rot, so mowing or grazing prior 
to the coolest, wettest months is often necessary.  Careful 
monitoring and grazing management is needed to prevent 
overgrazing crimson clover pasture, both alone and in 
mixtures.  Crimson clover is generally a low-bloat forage, 
but should be fed with a mixture of grasses to minimize 
the risk of bloat.  Other methods to avoid problems with 
bloat include providing dry hay to animals during periods 
of lush growth, avoiding turning hungry animals into a 
lush pasture, and providing anti-bloat materials (Ball and 
Lacefield, 2000).   
Reseeding: While some varieties of crimson clover have 
been selected for hard seed, seed does not persist long in 
the soil, so stands should still be allowed to make seed 
every year if reseeding is desired (Ball and Lacefield, 
2000).  As soon as bloom begins, livestock should be 
removed or stocking rates should be significantly reduced 
for at least a month to allow seed set.  Plants can then be 
grazed again or cut for hay.  Clover head weevils can 
severely limit reseeding potential some years if not 
controlled with an insecticide, but care should be taken to 
avoid harming bees if any sprays are used (Ball and 
Lacefield, 2000; Hancock, 2009). 
Cover crop termination: Crimson clover is easily killed 
mechanically by mowing or by spraying with herbicide 
after early bud stage, but N gains are maximized by 
waiting until late bloom or early seed set (Clark, 2007).  If 
spraying as part of a conservation tillage system, a 
systemic herbicide will produce a more complete kill than 
a contact herbicide (Owsley, 2012).  Clover can also be 
killed by a roller-crimper or rolling stalk chopper ahead of 

a no-till transplanter if it is in full bloom.  In northern 
regions (Hardiness Zone 5 and colder), crimson clover is 
used to provide a winterkilled mulch that can then be 
disked or directly planted into in the spring. 

Pests and Potential Problems 
The two most widespread, serious diseases of crimson 
clover are crown and stem rot (caused by Sclerotinia 
trifoliorum) and sooty blotch (caused by Cymadothea 
trifolii) (Hollowell, 1951).  Crown and stem rot is worst in 
the cool wet weather of fall, winter, and spring, and may 
completely destroy a stand.  Stands that are overly thick 
or rank throughout the winter months may create 
conditions that promote this rot, but fall and winter 
grazing that removes excess foliage can reduce the spread 
of the disease.  Sooty blotch is a leafspot disease evident 
during bloom.  Both diseases can be substantially reduced 
by rotating crimson clover to another location for a few 
years.  In general, crimson clover is more resistant to 
diseases and some nematodes than other species of clover 
(Clark, 2007).  Clover head weevil (Hypera meles), an 
introduced pest from Europe, can sometimes severely 
limit seed yields, but some newer cultivars have been bred 
to be insect resistant (Knight, 1985). 

Environmental Concerns 
Crimson clover is a secondary host plant to pests such as 
corn earworm and cotton bollworm in the genus 
Heliothus, and has been removed from roadsides in 
Mississippi due to concerns over increased populations of 
those pests (Clark, 2007). 

Control 
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use it safely.  Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method. 

Seeds and Plant Production 
In the Willamette Valley of Oregon, where much of the 
US crimson clover seed is produced, fields are planted in 
late September with the fall rains, flower in mid-May, and 
are harvested in late June to early July when about three-
fourths of the pods have turned golden brown (Aldrich-
Markham, 2012).  Plants are swathed at night, when they 
are damp with dew, to reduce losses of the easily 
shattered seed.  Seed is allowed to dry in the swath for 
about a week, and then harvested with a combine using a 
belt pick-up header.  Honeybee colonies placed in or near 
blooming fields will generally increase seed set and 
harvestable yields.  Seed set may range from 1,000 to 
1,200 lb/acre, but harvested yields are generally around 
750 lb/acre due to shatter before and during harvest 
(Chastain, 2012; Hollowell, 1951).  In Georgia, yields of 
improved cultivars such as ‘AU Sunrise’ and ‘AU Sunup’ 
harvested by direct combine are typically between 100 
and 200 pounds of clean seed per acre.  

 

 

 

Seed increase field of crimson clover at the USDA-NRCS Jimmy Carter 
Plant Materials Center, Americus, GA. 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
Crimson clover seed is widely available from commercial 
sources in both common type and improved cultivars.  
Cultivars should be chosen based on variety trial data 
from your local university.  Early-maturing cultivars are 
best for over-seeding on summer grass sod to avoid 
competition, and also for green manure crops to allow 
early spring termination (Ball and Lacefield, 2000).  Late 
cultivars may have higher yields if early termination and 
competition are not an issue, and can be grazed longer in 
the spring. 
‘Dixie’ is the oldest cultivar, and along with ‘Auburn,’ 
‘Autauga,’ ‘Chief,’ and ‘Talladega’ was once among the 
most widely used reseeding cultivars selected and/or bred 
for hardseededness (Knight, 1985).  Dixie, Auburn, and 
Autauga are early cultivars whose seed matures about a 
week earlier than that of Chief, Talladega, or common 
types.  Chief is the most winter-hardy cultivar.  Another 
reseeding cultivar, ‘Tibbee’ (released in 1970), along with 
a soft-seeded cultivar, ‘Frontier’ (1962), were bred for 
improved seedling vigor, greater fall and winter growth, 
and early maturity (Knight, 1985), but have been largely 
replaced by more modern cultivars.  ‘Flame’ (Florida, 
1989) and ‘AU Robin’ (Alabama, 1992) are cultivars that 
were selected for early maturity from stands of Dixie. 
‘AU Sunrise’ (1997) and ‘AU Sunup’ (2009) are 
reseeding cultivars jointly released by the USDA-NRCS 
Jimmy Carter Plant Materials Center in Americus, GA, 
and Auburn University (Owsley, 2007, 2009, 2012).  AU 
Sunrise was selected for vigor, growth, disease resistance, 
and especially early bloom date.  It blooms 5 to 18 days 
earlier than AU Robin (previously the earliest blooming 
crimson clover line on the market) and 12 to 28 days 
earlier than Tibbee.  AU Sunup was selected from the 
same line as AU Sunrise after another cycle of selections, 
and can flower 5 to 21 days earlier than AU Robin, and 7 
to 30 days earlier than Tibbee, depending on the year and 
location.  Both cultivars are well-adapted to Alabama and 
Georgia, and can also grow in Florida and Mississippi. 

References 
Aldrich-Markham, S. 2012. Clover seed production in 

Oregon. Oregon State Univ. Ext. Service, Corvallis. 
http://www.oregonclover.org/downloads/files/clovers
eedproduction.pdf (accessed 22 Aug. 2012). 

Ball, D.M., and G.D. Lacefield. 2000. Crimson clover. 
Circular 00-1. Oregon Clover Commission, Salem. 
http://www.oregonclover.org/downloads/files/crimso
nclover.pdf (accessed 21 Aug. 2012). 

Burke Museum of Natural History and Culture. 2012. 

Trifolium incarnatum, crimson clover. Univ. of 
Washington, Seattle. 
http://biology.burke.washington.edu/herbarium/imagi
magecollec.php?Genus=Trifolium&Species=incarnat
in (accessed 17 July 2012). 

Chastain, T.G. 2012. Seed yield and acreage trends in 

forage legume seed crops. Oregon State Univ. Seed 
Production Blog, 3 Apr. 
http://blogs.oregonstate.edu/seedproduction/2012/04/
03/seed-yield-and-acreage-trends-in-forage-legume-
seed-crops/ (accessed 22 Oct. 2012). 

Clark, A., editor. 2007. Managing cover crops profitably, 

3rd ed. National SARE Outreach Handbook Series 
Book 9. National Agric. Laboratory, Beltsville, MD. 

Douglas, G.W., D.V. Meidinger, and J. Pojar, editors. 
1999. Illustrated flora of British Columbia. Vol. 3. 
Trifolium incarnatum L. In: B. Klinkenberg, editor, 
2012, E-flora BC: electronic atlas of the plants of 
British Columbia. Lab for Advanced Spatial 
Analysis, Dep. of Geography, Univ. of British 
Columbia, Vancouver.  
http://linnet.geog.ubc.ca/Atlas/Atlas.aspx?sciname=T
Trifoliu%20incarnatum (accessed 20 Aug. 2012). 

Gardner, E.H., T.A. Doerge, D.B. Hannaway, H. 

Youngberg, and W.S. McGuire. 1983. Crimson 
clover, vetch, field peas—Western Oregon—west of 
the Cascades. Fertilizer guide 30. Oregon State Univ. 
Extension Service. 
http://ir.library.oregonstate.edu/xmlui/bitstream/handl
h/1957/20637/fg30-e.pdf (accessed 22 Oct. 2012). 
Hancock, D.W. 2009. Crimson clover. CSS-F002. Univ. 
of Georgia, Cooperative Extension, College of Agric. 
and Environ. Sci., Athens. 
http://www.caes.uga.edu/commodities/fieldcrops/fora
for/species/documents/CrimsonClover_000.pdf 
(accessed 21 Aug. 2012). 

Harper, C.A. 2004. Growing and managing successful 

food plots for wildlife in the mid-South. PB1743-7M-
9/04 E12-4915-00-007-04 04-0269. Univ. of 
Tennessee Agric. Extension Serv. 
http://trace.tennessee.edu/utk_agexfish/5 (accessed 
22 Aug. 2012).  

Hollowell, E.A. 1951. Crimson clover. In: H.D. Hughes, 
M.E. Heath, and D.S. Metcalfe, editors, Forages: the 
science of grassland agriculture. The Iowa State 
College Press, Ames. p. 206–214. 

Johnson, K.D., C.L. Rhykerd, and J.O. Trott. 2007. 
Forage selection and seeding guide for Indiana. 
Agron. Dep., Purdue Univ. Cooperative Extension 

 

 

research. Michigan State Univ., Kellogg Biological 
Station Land and Water Program, Hickory Corners. 
http://www.covercrops.msu.edu (accessed 30 Aug. 
2012). 

Oregon State University. 2011. Crimson clover brings 
boon to farmers and soil. Western Farm Press, 14 
June. http://westernfarmpress.com/management/ 
crimson-clover-brings-boon-farmers-and-soil?page=1 
(accessed 22 Oct. 2012). 

Owsley, M. 2007. Review of AU Sunrise crimson clover. 
USDA-NRCS Jimmy Carter Plant Materials Center, 
Americus, GA. http://www.plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov/pubs/gapmcmt7237.pdf 
(accessed 29 Aug. 2012). 

Owsley, M. 2009. Release brochure for ‘AU Sunrise’ 
crimson clover. USDA-NRCS Jimmy Carter Plant 
Materials Center, Americus, GA. http://www.plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov/pubs/gapmcrb8431.pdf 
(accessed 29 Aug. 2012). 

Owsley, M. 2012. Release brochure for ‘AU Sunup’ 

crimson clover. USDA-NRCS Jimmy Carter Plant 
Materials Center, Americus, GA. http://www.plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov/pubs/gapmcrb11076.pdf 
(accessed 29 Aug. 2012).   

Serv. http://www.agry.purdue.edu/ext/forages/ 
publications/ay253.htm#Table 3. Forage legume 
species characteristics. (accessed 22 Aug. 2012). 
Knight, W.E. 1985. Crimson clover. In: N.L. Taylor, 

editor, Clover science and technology. Agron. 
Monogr. 25. ASA-CSSA-SSSA, Madison, WI. p. 
491–502. 

Mutch, D.R., and T.E. Martin. 2010. Cover crops 

UC SAREP. 2012. Crimson clover. In: SAREP cover 
crops database. Sustainable Agric. Res. and Educ. 
Progr., Univ. of California. 
http://www.sarep.ucdavis.edu/database/covercrops 
(accessed 30 Aug. 2012).  

Vincent, M.A., and D. Isely. 2012 (v. 1.0). Jepson eFlora, 

Trifolium incarnatum L., Jepson Flora Project. 
http://ucjeps.berkeley.edu/IJM.html (accessed 17 July 
2012). 

Westgate, J.M. 1913. Crimson clover: growing the crop. 

USDA Farmers’ Bulletin 550, Washington, DC. 
Whyte, R.O., G. Nilsson-Leissner, and H.C. Trumble. 
1953. Legumes in agriculture. FAO agricultural 
studies no. 1. Food and Agric. Organ. of the United 
Nations, Rome. 

Wickline, B., and E. Rayburn. 2008. Using crimson 

clover to supply nitrogen to a silage corn crop. West 
Virginia Univ. Extension Serv. 
http://www.wvu.edu/~agexten/ageng/Using_Crimson
_Clover_to_Supply_Nitrogen_to_a_Silage_Corn_Cr
op.pdf (accessed 22 Aug. 2012). 

 
Prepared By:   
Annie Young-Mathews, Conservation Agronomist 
USDA-NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials Center, Oregon 

 

Citation 
Young-Mathews, A. 2013. Plant guide for crimson clover 
(Trifolium incarnatum). USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Plant Materials Center, Corvallis, 
OR. 

Published February, 2013 
Edited: 5Sep2012 cms; 17Sep2012 aaj; 18Sep2012 klp; 16Jan2013 plsp; 
4 Feb2013 jab 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

