  

 

Natural Resources Conservation Service  

 

American Vetch  

Vicia americana  
Muhl. ex Willd. 
Symbol =VIAM 

 

American vetch. Photo ©Al Schneider, 
www.swcoloradowildflowers.com, used with permission. 

 

Alternate Names:   
Purple vetch  
American deer vetch  
Stiff-leaf vetch 
 
Scientific Names:   
Vicia americana var. americana  
Vicia americana var. minor Hook 

Description 
American vetch is a native rhizomatous, single-stemmed, 
climbing perennial forb that measurers up to 16 inches 
tall.  The 8 to 16 leaflets are broadly elliptical to linear 
measuring 0.4 to 1.5 inches in length.  The lower stipules 
are deeply lacerated, often appearing star-like (Isley 
1998). The inflorescence is a raceme with up to 10 purple 
flowers approximately 0.5 to 1.5 inches long.  Flowering 
occurs from May to August with the seeds maturing 
around one month after pollination (Voss, 1985; Wasser, 
1982). The fruit is a 1 to 1.5 inch long pod bearing two to 
several pea-like seeds. There are approximately 33,000 
seeds/lb (USDA-NRCS, 2015). American vetch has a 
moderate to deeply-branched taproot which reaches a 
maximum depth of 40 inches.  The deep tap root allows 
for the plant to exhibit characteristics of severe drought 
tolerance.   
 

Plant Guide 

PLANTS currently recognizes three subspecies of 
American vetch: ssp. americana, ssp. minor, and ssp. 
mexicana (USDA-NRCS, 2015). V. a. ssp. americana 
bears more flowers, (5-9) per inflorescence, and is more 
sprawling with prehensile, often branched, tendrils.  V. a. 
minor has 3 to 4 flowers per inflorescence, erect stems 
and non-prehensile tendrils (Isley, 1998).  Subspecies 
mexicana has calyx teeth all equal, differing from V. a. 
ssp. americana which has the upper two calyx teeth much 
shorter than the lower three (Gunn, 1979).  
 
Distribution:  American vetch is widely distributed west 
of the Mississippi River, in the northeastern United States, 
Alaska, and parts of Canada (Stubbendiek and Conard, 
1989). Mexican American vetch (V. a. ssp. mexicana) is 
restricted to the Sierra Leon Mountains in Mexico and is 
geographically separated from V. a. ssp. americana 
(Gunn, 1979). V. a. ssp. minor is found primarily in the 
short grass prairie but extends into the Intermountain 
region. V. a. ssp. americana covers the range of the 
species (Isley, 1998). 
 

 

American vetch distribution from USDA-NRCS PLANTS Database. 

Habitat:   
American vetch grows in a wide variety of habitats. It is 
typically found in moist areas, including swampy woods, 
mixed forests, sheltered canyons, and clearings, but can 
also be found in arid locations on hilltops or valley 
badlands (Cronquist et al, 1989).   
Adaptation 
American vetch is drought tolerant and has the ability to 
fix nitrogen into the soil (Stubbendiek and Conard, 1989). 
American vetch occurs frequently on slightly saline to 
moderately acidic soils of medium to coarse texture, but 
can also be found on clays. In western mountains, 
American vetch is usually more abundant in deep porous 

 

loams that are rich in organic matter.  American vetch is 
adapted to a wide range of plant communities from arid to 
mesic. It can be found growing in sites receiving as little 
as 10 inches mean annual precipitation to as much as 50 
or more inches (Tilley et al, 2013). 

Uses 
Restoration: Relatives of American vetch are often used 
as cover crops.  Planting American vetch in disturbed 
sites can help remediate the habitat and restore disturbed 
rangelands by providing a natural source of nitrogen 
(Kirk, and Belt, 2010). American vetch has been 
successfully seeded in disturbed alpine rangelands 
(Brown et al, 1979). American vetch is one of the few 
non-toxic native legumes adapted to sites receiving less 
than 12 inches mean annual precipitation, making it a 
valuable option for native restoration seedings on arid 
rangeland (Tilley et al, 2013). 
 
Wildlife: American vetch provides high quality, although 
limited, grazing and fodder for game birds, small 
mammals, black bear, grizzly bear, and mule deer 
(Coladonato, 1993).  Domesticated animals such as 
horses, sheep, and cattle will browse on the aerial portions 
of American vetch.  It is considered preferred forage in 
spring and summer and desired in fall and winter for elk, 
deer, and antelope (Ogle and Brazee 2009).  
 
Pollinator: American vetch is an important species for 
native pollinators. It is a known larval host plant for the 
western blue tailed butterfly (Everes amyntula) (Stout, 
2015). American vetch has showy flowers and can be 
included in wildflower plantings and pollinator gardens.  

Ethnobotany: Indigenous peoples used the seed leaves 
and seeds of American vetch as a source of food 
(Castetter, 1935). A poultice of the leaves has been used 
to treat aliments such as spider bites, and an infusion of 
the plant was used as an eyewash (Vestal, 1952). 
American vetch has also been used as a panacea, an 
aphrodisiac, and a good luck charm.  Native Americans 
would get horses to smoke the plant to increase the 
horses’ endurance (Wyman, 1951). 
 
Status 
Threatened or Endangered:  American vetch is listed as 
endangered or extirpated in Maryland (USDA-NRCS, 
2015). 

Planting Guidelines 
The full stand seeding rate for approximately 25 seeds/ft² 
is 33 PLS lbs/ac (Tilley et al, 2013). American vetch 
should be seeded in the fall to a depth of 1 to 2 inches.  
Unscarified seed will germinate in approximately 14 days.  
Scarification decreases the overall seed germination time 
between 3 to 7 days; however the scarification process 
does not improve the overall germination rate (Rose, 
1998).  The climbing nature of this plant should be 
considered when planting.  Sowing the plant in 

combination with more upright growing species will 
ensure a climbing matrix to support the vetch.  Vetch 
cover crops, including hairy vetch (V. villosa) and 
common vetch (V. sativa) are seeded at 20 to 40 pounds 
per acre. 

Management 
American vetch could be used as a minor component of 
restoration seed mixtures. Management strategies should 
be based on the key species in the established plant 
community. Grazing should be deferred on seeded lands 
for at least two growing seasons to allow for full stand 
establishment. 

Pests and Potential Problems 
Vicia spp. are susceptible to several species of Botrytis 
fungus.  Vetch seeds are also susceptible to vetch bruchid, 
or vetch weevil (Bruchus sp.) injury (Bridwell, 1933).   

Environmental Concerns 
American vetch is a natural component of many native 
plant communities in North America. There are no known 
environmental concerns regarding American vetch.   

Seeds and Plant Production 
Hand harvesting of wildland populations with clippers or 
shears is the most common means of seed collection. Due 
to its low and twining growth habit, mechanical and 
vacuum harvesting are ineffective (Burton, 2015). Seed 
production fields may be harvested mechanically. It is 
suggested that a nurse crop such as alfalfa be used to 
elevate American vetch for easier harvesting. Species 
selected should have significantly dissimilar seed size and 
weight for easy separation (Burton, 2015). 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
There are no recommended cultivars or selected materials 
for American vetch at this time. Seed source should be 
selected based on the local climate, resistance to local 
pests, and intended use. Consult with your local land 
grant university, local extension, or local USDA NRCS 
office for recommendations on adapted cultivars or 
germplasms for use in your area. 
 
Literature Cited 
Bridwell, J.C. (1933). The hairy-vetch bruchid, Bruchus 
brachialis Fahraeus, in the United States. Journal of 
Agricultural Research, 46, 739−751.  

Brown, Ray W.; Johnston, Robert S. 1979. Revegetation 

of disturbed alpine rangelands. In: Johnson, D. A., 
ed. Special management needs of alpine ecosystems. 
Range Science Series No. 5. Denver, CO: Society for 
Range Management: 76-94.  
Burton, C.M., Burton, P.J. 2015. A Manual for Growing 
and Using Seed from herbaceous Plants Native to the 
Northern Interior of British Columbia. Symbios 
Research & Restoration, Smithers, BC. Accessed 
online: 

 

http://www.env.gov.bc.ca/wld/natplant_manual_intro
pg.htm.  

Castetter, Edward F. 1935 Ethnobiological Studies in the 

American Southwest I. Uncultivated Native Plants 
Used as Sources of Food. University of New Mexico 
Bulletin 4(1):1-44. 

Coladonato, Milo. 1993. Vicia americana. In: Fire Effects 

Information System, [Online]. U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain 
Research Station, Fire Sciences Laboratory 
(Producer). Accessed online: 
http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/ [2015, March 30]. 
Cronquist, A., Holmgren, A.H., Holmgren N.H., Reveal, 
J.L., and P.K. Holmgren. 1989. Intermountain Flora: 
Vascular Plants of the Intermountain West, U.S.A. 
Volume 3, Part B. Fabales. The New York Botanical 
Garden. Bronx, New York. 279p. 

Gunn, C.R. 1979. Genus Vicia with notes about tribe 

Vicieae (Fabaceae) in Mexico and Central America. 
US Department of Agriculture, Technical Bulletin 
No. 1601. 41p. 

Kirk, S. and Belt, S. 2010.  Plant fact sheet for American 
Vetch (Vicia americana), USDA, Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Norman A. Berg National 
Plant Materials Center, Beltsville, MD 20705 

Isley, D. 1998. Native and naturalized Leguminosae 

(Fabaceae) of the United States (exclusive of Alaska 
and Hawaii) Provo, UT: Brigham Young University. 
941-944p. 

Ogle, D.G. and B. Brazee. 2009. Technical Note 3. 

Estimating Initial Stocking Rates. NRCS. Boise, ID. 
39p. 

Rose, R., Chacuhlski, C. and Haase, D. 1998. Propagation 

of Pacific Northwest Native Plants. Oregon State 
University Press. Corvallis, OR. 1998.  

Stubbendiek, J. and Conard, E. C. 1989. Common 

legumes of the Great Plains: an illustrated guide. 
Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press. 330 p.   

Tilley, D., Taliga, C., Burns, C. and L. St. John. 2013. 
Technical Note 2c.  Plant Materials for Pollinators 
and Other Beneficial Insects in Eastern Utah and 
Western Colorado. NRCS. Boise, ID. 54p. 

USDA-NRCS. 2015. The PLANTS Database 

(http://plants.usda.gov, 31 March 2015). National 
Plant Data Team, Greensboro, NC 27401-4901 USA. 

Vestal, P. A. 1952. The Ethnobotany of the Ramah 

Navaho. Papers of the Peabody Museum of American 
Archaeology and Ethnology 40(4):1-94. 

Voss, Edward G. 1985. Michigan flora. Part II. Dicots 

(Saururaceae--Cornaceae). Bull. 59. Bloomfield 
Hills, MI: Cranbrook Institute of Science; Ann Arbor, 
MI: University of Michigan Herbarium. 724p.  
Wasser, C. H. 1982. Ecology and culture of selected 

species useful in revegetating disturbed lands in the 
West. FWS/OBS-82/56. Washington, DC: U.S. 
Department of the Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service. 
347p.  

Welsh, S.L., Atwood, N.D., Goodrich, S., and L.C. 
Higgins. 2003. A Utah Flora. Brigham Young 
University. Provo, Utah.  912p. 

Wyman, L. C. and S. K. Harris. 1951. The Ethnobotany 

of the Kayenta Navaho. Albuquerque, NM. The 
University of New Mexico Press. 

 
Citation 
Allen, J.  and D. Tilley. 2014. Plant Guide for American 
Vetch (Vicia americana). USDA-Natural Resources 
Conservation Service, Idaho Plant Materials Center.   
Aberdeen, Idaho 83210. 

Published   
April 2015 
 
Edited:  

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the  
Plant Materials Program Web site: 
http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites.

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 

Helping People Help the Land 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

