 
 

 

Plant Guide

flower’s lower petals. In addition, birds and mice use the 
seeds of hookedspur violet as a food source.  
 
Habitat Restoration:  Hookedspur violet is used for 
coastal butterfly habitat restoration in the Pacific 
Northwest, and is established by either seed or as plugs.  

Ornamental: Hookedspur violet is a popular ornamental 
plant for wildflower and butterfly gardens in the Pacific 
Northwest.  
 
Status 
Viola adunca is listed as endangered by the State of 
Massachusetts. Please consult the PLANTS Web site and 
your State Department of Natural Resources for this 
plant’s current status (e.g., threatened or endangered 
species, state noxious status, and wetland indicator 
values). 

Description 
General: Hookedspur violet is a common, native, 
perennial forb of the violet family (Violaceae) with short 
to elongate slender rhizomes. Plants typically grow to 
approximately 4 inches in height. A branched stem from 
hairy rhizomes terminates in round to oval 2 inch leaves. 
Flowers are pale to deep violet with a white patch and 
purple veins at the base of the lower three petals, which 
act as nectar guides for bees. The two side petals have 
white beards at the base and hooked spurs at the tips 
(Clark and Trelawny, 1998). In this species, petaliferous 
flowers are produced in the spring while cleistogamous 
flowers are produced later in the season (Reznick and 
Voss, 2011). Seeds are borne in unique pods and are 
explosively thrown some distance when pods burst. 
Hookedspur violet blooms in midspring (Clark and 
Trelawny, 1998).  
 

Hookedspur violet, Image Courtesy of USDA PLANTS, 2012 

 

 

HOOKEDSPUR VIOLET 

Viola adunca Sm. 
Plant Symbol = VIAD 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS Corvallis Plant Materials 
Center, Oregon 

 

Hookedspur violet, Photo by Amy Bartow, Corvallis Plant Materials 
Center, 2008 
  
Alternate Names 
Alternate Common Names: early blue violet, western blue 
violet, western long-spurred violet, western dog violet, 
hooked violet, sand violet 

Warning: The rhizomes, fruit, and seeds are poisonous 
to humans, and can cause upset stomach, intestinal 
problems, respiratory and circulatory depression.   
 
Uses 
Wildlife: The Mardon skipper butterfly (Polites mardon) 
uses the hookedspur violet as a spring-flowering nectar 
source, and is listed as a State of Washington Endangered 
Species and a Federal Candidate Species. Zerene fritillary 
butterflies (Speyeria zerene) use hookedspur violet as a 
larval host, and three subspecies of the Zerene fritillary 
are listed on the Federal Endangered Species List, 
including the Myrtle’s silverspot (ssp. myrtleae), the 
Behren’s silverspot (ssp. behrensii), and the Oregon 
silverspot (ssp. hippolyta). The Myrtle’s and Behren’s 
silverspot are also classified as endangered in California, 
and the Oregon silverspot is classified as threatened in 
California, Oregon, and Washington (Hayduck, 2012) 
Bees and other insects pollinate hookedspur violet, and 
are led to the flower’s nectaries by purple veins on the 

 

Distribution:  Hookedspur violet is found extensively in 
the western half of the United States to New England and 
northward throughout Canada. For current distribution, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species on 
the PLANTS Web site. 

Habitat: Hookedspur violet inhabits varied environments 
including dry to moist meadows, coastal areas, open 
woods, grasslands, and open, disturbed ground; from 
lowlands to near timberline. 

Ethnobotany 
Hookedspur violet was used in traditional medicine by the 
Blackfoot, Bella Coola and Tolowa tribes. Leaves and 
roots were used to treat stomach problems and asthma in 
children, and as a cataplasm to treat soreness and 
swelling. In addition, the Southern Carrier, and Klallam 
used the plant as an analgesic and gastrointestinal aid, and 
the Makah tribe used it as a gynecological aid (Appell, 
2000). 
 
The leaves and flowers of all violets are edible, and can 
be eaten in salads, used as potherbs, or brewed as tea. In 
addition, these plant parts are high in vitamins A and C, 
and can be used as garnishes, flavorings, colorings, and 
thickeners (Appell, 2000).  
 
The Blackfoot Indians used a blue dye obtained from 
hookedspur violet to dye arrows (Appell, 2000). 

Adaptation 
Hookedspur violet is well adapted to frequent disturbance 
that controls taller, faster growing competitors. In 
addition, it is tolerant of salt spray when growing on the 
coast, and is adapted to seasonally saturated/droughty 
soils. It can grow in well-drained, sandy, loamy, or clayey 
soils with a neutral to slightly acidic pH.  

Establishment 
Seeds can be sown on restoration sites in the fall at a rate 
of 1 pound per acre, or 50 seeds per square foot. Seeds 
should be sown less than 1/8 inch deep and covered 
lightly with soil or vermiculite. Seeds experience 
dormancy and need up to 120 days of wet, cool conditions 
(stratification) to trigger germination in the spring.  Plants 
can also be established from plugs on restoration sites. 
Timing and spacing of plantings will depend on site 
conditions, and management objectives. Plugs can be 
sown in either the fall or spring, and can be spaced as 
closely as 6 inches.   

Management 
Hookedspur violet prefers recently disturbed sites, and is 
easily outcompeted by taller or more vigorous plants. 
Management to control competition and prevent 
encroachment of trees may be necessary to ensure 
survival of this species on restoration sites. Mowing, or 
low to moderately intense burning in the fall may be a 
feasible means of controlling competition.  

 

 

 
Pests and Potential Problems 
This species is covered with many types of insects, but no 
damage has been observed to established plants. 
Developing seed is highly predated by both birds and 
mice, and control measures are necessary to avoid loss of 
large amounts of seed in seed production fields. Slugs 
overwinter in violet crowns but typically do not cause 
enough damage to warrant control measures.  

Environmental Concerns 
Existing populations of hookedspur violet may face 
increased pressure due to habitat loss, and disruption of 
historic disturbance regimes.  
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Establishment: Seeds experience dormancy and need up 
to 120 days of wet, cool conditions to trigger germination 
in the spring. For best establishment of seed production 
fields, stratify seeds in a cooler, sow into plugs in a 
greenhouse in late winter, and transplant out in spring. 
Transplanting into fields covered in weed fabric 
containing holes on a 1 foot by 1 foot spacing is most 
efficient for weed control and ease of seed harvest. 
Irrigation is not necessary, and weed control is primarily 
accomplished through the use of weed fabric on seed 
production fields. Hand weeding may be necessary where 
soil is exposed within the holes in the weed fabric, and 
field borders need to be kept clean using herbicides or 
tillage as weed fabric can easily catch undesired wind 
borne or ejected seeds from many feet away. Seeds ripen 
and are expelled onto weed fabric throughout the summer. 
Plants typically stop flowering in mid summer, yet still 
produce capsules filled with seed. The weed fabric 
collects all of the seed but also creates potential for 
predation by birds and mice that requires control 
measures such as traps and netting. 

 

Hookedspur violet seed production field; photo by Amy Bartow, 
Corvallis Plant Materials Center, 2011 

 

 

Harvest Method: Production fields can be harvested by 
vacuuming shattered seed from the surface of weed fabric 
before fall rains begin. Fields are crawled and harvested 

 

using a shop vacuum powered by a generator. Care must 
be taken to vacuum seeds from under each plant, and 
from within the holes in the weed fabric. Plant material 
collected by the vacuum is placed in a tub to dry prior to 
cleaning.  
 
Seed Cleaning: Following drying, an air screen machine 
can be used to separate seed from empty seed pods, chaff, 
and dirt. If necessary, a brush machine or thresher can be 
used to break up seed pods that have not fully opened.  
 
Yield & Longevity: Hookedspur violet flowers and sets 
seed in the first year, if produced from plugs, yielding 
approximately 37 lb seed per acre the first year. 
Significantly higher seed yields of 180 lb per acre can be 
expected in the second and third years of production. 
Plants typically live upwards of five years and sustain 
high yields.  
 

 
Hookedspur violet seed; photo by Robert C. Hoffman, Corvallis Plant 
Materials Center, 2012 

  

Viola by Native Americans [Online]. Available at 
http://americanvioletsociety.org/Violets_In_America/ 
Ethnobotanical.htm (modified 2000; accessed 13 Mar 
2012). American Violet Society. 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
None, but containerized plants are sometimes available 
from commercial sources in the Pacific Northwest. 
 
References 
Appell, S.D. 2000. The ethnobotanical uses of the genus 
 
 
 
 
Clark, L.J., and J. Trelawny. 1998. Wild Flowers of the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Pacific Northwest. Harbor, Madeira Park. 

 
Hayduck, E. 2012. SPP Plant Profile: Early-Blue 
Violet (Viola adunca). [Online]. Available at 
 
http://blogs.evergreen.edu/sustainableprisons/blog/20
 
12/01/12/spp-plant-profile-early-blue-violet-viola-
 
adunca/ (modified 12 Jan 2012; accessed 13 Mar 
 
 
2012). The Evergreen State College and Washington 
State Department of Corrections Sustainable Prisons
 
 
Project, Olympia, WA. 
Reznick, A.A, and E.G. Voss. 2011. MICHIGAN FLORA 
 
 
 
 
USDA, NRCS. 2012. The PLANTS Database. Available 
 
 
 
Prepared By:  Robert C. Hoffman, Corvallis Plant 
Materials Center, Oregon 

ONLINE: Viola. [Online]. Available at 
http://michiganflora.net/genus.aspx?id=viola  
(modified Feb. 2011; accessed 27 March 2012). 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI.   

at http://plants.usda.gov (Accessed 15 Mar 2012). 
National Plant Data Team, Greensboro, NC. 

Citation 
Hoffman, R. 2012. Plant guide for hookedspur violet 
(Viola adunca). USDA-Natural Resources Conservation 
Service, Plant Materials Center, Corvallis, OR. 

Published March, 2012 
Edited: 21Mar2012 aym;15October2012jab  

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

