 
 

 

Plant Guide

DEER PEA VETCH 
Vicia ludoviciana Nutt. 

Plant Symbol = VILU 

For current distribution, please consult the Plant 
Profile page for this species on the PLANTS Web 
site. 
 
Adaptation 
Deer pea vetch grows best on medium to heavy 
textured soils.   

Establishment 
Seedbed preparation should begin well in advance of 
planting.  Planting should be done in late fall to early 
winter in South Texas. Deer pea vetch can also be 
included in warm-season planting mixtures, but will 
not establish until the fall after planting. Establish a 
clean, weed-free seedbed by either tillage or 
herbicides. Prior to planting, the site should be firm 
and have accumulated soil moisture. 
 
Deer pea vetch can be seeded using a drill or 
broadcaster.  If broadcast seeded, some type of 
additional coverage such as culti-packing or light 
dragging is recommended to ensure good seed to soil 
contact. 

 

Seed should be planted 1/8 to 1/4 inch deep. It is 
better to plant too shallow than too deep.   
 
If one plant per square foot has become established in 
field plantings, then the seeding can be considered 
successful. 

Management 
Areas planted to Hoverson Germplasm should be 
deferred for 30 days to allow plants to become 
established.  Established plants should be allowed to 
produce seed annually because in many areas with 
proper soil moisture deer pea vetch readily reseeds 
itself with minimal soil disturbance.  As perennial 
cover increase on most sites deer pea vetch decreases 
without soil disturbance.  
 
Pests and Potential Problems 
No severe insect or disease problems have been 
observed in deer pea vetch once established. 
 
Environmental Concerns 
There are no known environmental concerns 
associated with deer pea vetch.   
 
Seeds and Plant Production 
Seed increase plots have been managed by flat drill 
planting on 8” rows.  It can also be grown from 
transplants planted in the late fall.  Harvesting when 

 

Deer pea vetch plant. Photo by Forrest Smith, South Texas 
Natives, Kingsville, TX. 

Contributed by:  USDA NRCS E. “Kika” de la Garza 
Plant Materials Center and South Texas Natives 

Uses 
Livestock: Deer pea vetch (Vicia ludoviciana Nutt.) a 
cool season annual legume that is grazed by 
livestock.   
 
Wildlife:  Deer pea vetch provides leaf material for 
wildlife forage.  It also produces seeds which are 
eaten by bobwhite quail and Rio Grande Turkeys. 

Status 
Please consult the PLANTS Web site and your State 
Department of Natural Resources for this plant’s 
current status (e.g., threatened or endangered species, 
state noxious status, and wetland indicator values). 

Description 
General:  Deer pea vetch is a cool season, annual 
legume that has climbing stems.  Leaves are 3-9 cm 
long with 6 to 12 leaflets rachis terminating in a 
usually forked tendril.  Flowers are generally solitary, 
and are  lavender-blue in color.  Pods are 2-3 cm. 
long, with 4 to 8 seeds in each pod.  Seed is spherical 
in shape very hard and light brown in color with dark 
brown markings (Correll and Johnston, 1970).  

Distribution:  The natural range of deer pea vetch is 
throughout the southern half of the United States.  

 

 

50% of the seed is ripe allows for some seed to 
shatter allowing stand to reseed itself for subsequent 
years of harvest.   
 
Seed can be harvested using a combine with a grain 
header.  This harvest method will result in both green 
and mature seed, as well as other high moisture 
material in the harvested product.  Most of the green 
seed will mature, but care must be taken to insure 
adequate seed drying procedures are followed to 
prevent molding and heating of this mixture.   Seed 
harvested with this method is best cleaned by 
hammer milling to release seed from un-opened pods, 
then screened using a Clipper seed cleaner. 
 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and 
area of origin) 
Hoverson Germplasm deer pea vetch was released by 
South Texas Natives, the E. “Kika” de la Garza Plant 
Materials Center, and Texas AgriLife Research 
Beeville in 2012.  It was selected for its seed 
production, plant vigor, forage production and its 
ability to be harvested.  Hoverson Germplasm has 
also shown excellent performance when used as a 
component of range plantings.  This germplasm is 
known to be adapted to the Rio Grande Plain, Gulf 
Coast Prairies and Marshes, and Coastal Sand Plains 
Ecoregions of South Texas.   
 
For calibration purposes, Hoverson Germplasm 
contains approximately 66,000 seeds per bulk pound.  
A seeding rate of 5-10 pounds of pure live seed 
(PLS) per acre is recommended.  In planting mixtures 
reduce the rate according to the percent of deer pea 
vetch desired on the planting site.  Breeder seed is 
maintained by South Texas Natives.     

Well managed seed fields of Hoverson Germplasm 
have produced 200 bulk pounds of clean seed per 
year.  Purity of the seed is usually around 70% and 
germination rates average near 90%.  Hoverson 
Germplasm typically has 50% dormant seed, 
however after scarafiction active germination is 
increased to 90%.  It produces one seed crop per year 
when grown in south Texas.   

 

References 
Correll, D. S., and M. C. Johnston.  1970.  Manual of 

the vascular plants of Texas.  Texas  
Research Foundation, Renner, TX. 

Everitt, H.J., D.L. Drawe, and R.L. Lonard. 1999. 

Field Guide to the Broad-Leaved Herbaceous 
Plants of South Texas. Texas Tech University 
Press, Pg. 145. 

Smith, F.S., A.D. Falk, and W.R. Ocumpaugh. 2012.  

Notice of Release of Hoverson Germplasm deer 
pea vetch.  Caesar Kleberg Wildlife Research 
Institute. Kingsville, TX. 

 
Prepared By:   
John Lloyd-Reilley, Manager 
USDA-NRCS, E. “Kika” de la Garza Plant Materials 
Center, Kingsville, Texas 
 
Forrest S. Smith, Director 
South Texas Natives, Caesar Kleberg Wildlife 
Research Institute, Texas A&M University-
Kingsville, Kingsville, Texas  

Citation 
Lloyd-Reilley, J. and F. Smith. 2012.  Hoverson 
Germplasm deer pea vetch. USDA-Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, E. “Kika” de la 
Garza Plant Materials Center and South Texas 
Natives, Caesar Kleberg Wildlife Research Institute, 
Texas A&M University-Kingsville, Kingsville, Texas 
78363.   

Published August 2012 

For more information about this and other plants, 
please contact your local NRCS field office or 
Conservation District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ 
and visit the PLANTS Web site at 
http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant Materials Program 
Web site http://plant-materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or 
availability of other Web sites. 

 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

