 
 

 

Plant Guide

prevention and weed suppression. Allelopathic 
compounds in the plant may help to suppress weeds 
(Clark, 2007). It has also been used successfully as 
groundcover in orchards and intercropped with cash crops 
such as cotton.  
 
Wildlife: Cowpea is eaten by deer as forage, and is 
commonly used in food plots for deer. A variety of birds, 
including wild turkey, eat the seeds and the plant can be 
used by quail as cover. Some varieties of cowpea are used 
specifically for wildlife purposes (Ball et al., 2007).  
 
Ethnobotany: Cowpea has been a staple crop and 
important protein source for many cultures since the 
Roman Empire. It was the most commonly cultivated 
bean used for human consumption in the Old World 
(Allen and Allen, 1981). Roman writers such as Pliny 
referred to it as phaseolus. Thomas Jefferson is credited 
with first using the name cowpea. Today the crop is still 
widely popular, and good harvests are critical to ensure 
adequate levels of protein in the diets of populations in 
India and East Asia (Allen and Allen, 1981). 
 
Status 
Cowpea is an introduced species in the United States. It is 
native to tropical and subtropical regions. It can grow 
both wild and cultivated. Please consult the PLANTS 
Web site and your State Department of Natural Resources 
for this plant’s current status (e.g., threatened or 
endangered species, state noxious status, and wetland 
indicator values). 

Description 
General: Cowpea is a warm-season, annual legume that 
exhibits a wide range of growth habits. Varieties may be 
short and bushy, prostrate, or tall and vine-like. Canopy 
heights can be 2–3 feet, depending on the variety.  
 
The upright stems are hollow and hairless, roughly 0.4 or 
2/5 inch (1 cm) wide. The stems of twining varieties are 
thinner. The 4 inch (10 cm) long and 3 inch (8 cm) wide 
leaves are three-parted, egg-shaped, and hairless. The two 
lateral leaves are asymmetrical, and the terminal leaf is 
symmetrical. The plant also has extra floral nectaries, 
small pores on its leaves and stems of leaves that release 
nectar and attract beneficial insects.  
 
The branchless inflorescence produces stemmed flowers, 
1 inch (2.5 cm) long, along the main axis. The flowers can 
be purple or white. The lowermost whorl of leaves under 
the flower is bell-shaped. The lobes of the flower are 
fused, and the lateral petals are shorter than the upper 
petal.  

COWPEA 

Vigna unguiculata (L.) Walp. 

Plant Symbol = VIUN 

Contributed by: USDA NRCS Cape May Plant Materials 
Center, Cape May, NJ 

 

Cowpea (Vigna unguiculata). (Photo by Christopher Sheahan, USDA-
NRCS, Cape May Plant Materials Center) 

Alternate Names 
Alternate Common Names: blackeyed pea, field pea, 
southern pea, crowder pea, caupi, catjang, yardlong bean 
 
Alternate Scientific Names: 
Vigna sinensis (L.) Savi, 

Uses 
Commercial crop: Cowpea is commonly cultivated as a 
nutritious and highly palatable food source in the southern 
United States, Middle East, Africa, Asia, and throughout 
the tropics and subtropics. The seed is reported to contain 
24% crude protein, 53% carbohydrates, and 2% fat (FAO, 
2012). The leaves and flowers can also be consumed. 
  
Forage: Cowpea can be used as forage, hay, and silage. 
When used as forage, it should only be lightly grazed 
after flowering (FAO, 2012). If there are several buds left 
after defoliation, the plant will regenerate. When used as 
silage, it can be mixed with sorghum, maize, or molasses 
to provide sugar for fermentation (FAO, 2012). In some 
African countries, several varieties of Cowpea has been 
grown together for both food and feed (Cook et al., 2005). 
 
Cover crop/green manure: Cowpea is a quick growing 
cover crop that produces 2,500–4,500 lb/acre/yr of dry 
matter, while providing 100–150 lb/acre of N to the 
subsequent crop (Clark, 2007). Its long taproot and wide, 
vegetative spread make it an excellent plant for erosion 

 

The seeds are born in 3 to 6-inch (8–15 cm) long, slender, 
round, two-valved pods growing from the leaf axils. 
There are roughly 6–13 seeds per pod growing within 
spongy tissue. The kidney-shaped seeds are white with a 
black mark around the scar that marks the point of 
attachment to the seed stalk. 
 
V. unguiculata is different from the two other cultivated 
forms of cowpea, the subspecies V. catjang and V. 
sesquipedalis with respect to the shape and length of the 
pod and seed characteristics (Allen and Allen, 1981). 
These characteristics are variable and often hard to 
discern as the plant can readily cross-fertilize and produce 
fertile hybrids. 
 
Nodules on the roots of cowpea fix nitrogen in the soil.  
 
Distribution: In the United States, cowpea can be found in 
cultivation from the Great Lakes south to Florida, from 
the Atlantic coast west to Texas, and in California. For 
current distribution, please consult the Plant Profile page 
for this species on the PLANTS Web site. 

Habitat: Cowpea grows best in hot conditions. It can 
grow in moderate shade, but in agroforestry or orchard 
applications, shade should not be too heavy.  

Adaptation 
Cowpea has been cultivated and domesticated in Africa 
for centuries. It is now grown worldwide, especially in the 
tropics. It is a warm-season crop that can be produced in 
semi-arid regions and dry savannas. It is better adapted to 
sandy soils and droughty conditions than soybeans (TJAI, 
2010). It can be grown in regions with an average annual 
rainfall of 2.5 to 8 inches (Cook et al., 2005). The largest 
producers are Nigeria, Niger, Brazil, Haiti, India, 
Myanmar, Sri Lanka, Australia and the United States 
(TJAI, 2010).  

Establishment 
Cowpea readily germinates and the young plants are 
robust. Planting dates and temperatures are roughly the 
same as soybean. Planting dates should be late May 
through mid-June. A daytime temperature of 80°F (FAO, 
2012) and a consistent soil temperature of at least 65°F 
(TJAI, 2010) are best. Plants require well-drained, highly 
acid to neutral soils, but can grow well in a range of soil 
types, including soils with low fertility. The plant is very 
drought resistant and does not survive flooded conditions 
(Clark, 2007).  
 
Inoculation of seed is not required, but using a cowpea 
strain (EL-type) can be advantageous for growth (FAO, 
2012). Both wild and cultivated plants naturally nodulate 
in a variety of soils (Allen and Allen, 1981). Seed should 
be sown 1 to 2 inches deep in early summer at 50 lb/acre 
(TJAI, 2010), or roughly 4–8 plants per row foot (TJAI, 
2010) with 30-inch row spacing. Smaller amounts should 

be used if seed is drilled (30 lb/acre) and larger amounts 
should be used if broadcast (85 lb/acre) (FAO, 2012).  
 
An eight foot taproot can develop in roughly eight weeks 
(Clark, 2007). Flowering occurs in roughly 48 days 
(Anyia and Herzog, 2004), and earlier varieties will 
produce pods in roughly 60 days (TJAI, 2010). Total 
biomass in the summer can be 2,000–4,000 lb/acre (FAO, 
2012; Clark, 2007). Cowpea has the potential to reseed 
from previous plantings.  

Management 
Cowpea can be planted in mixtures with buckwheat or 
sorghum-sudangrass to maximize its potential to suppress 
weeds. It is often interseeded into corn for weed 
suppression (Clark, 2007). Although cowpea is known to 
be a quick-growing weed-fighter, it is less successful at 
suppressing perennial grasses, so cultivation of rows may 
be required for weed control when it is grown for dry 
seed. Because cowpea can grow on nutrient poor soils and 
fix its own nitrogen, no nitrogen fertilizer is required.  
 
The best time to harvest cowpea hay is when the seed 
pods have fully ripened. Plants can be cut with a sickle-
bar mower then harvested with a bailer for conventional 
harvest or be crimped with a roller crimper when used as 
a green manure. For use as a green manure in California, 
the plant is turned into the soil 60–90 days after planting 
(Clark, 2007). Allelopathic properties in the residue 
should be monitored, as they may negatively affect the 
subsequent cash crop. A conventional grain combine can 
be used for harvesting dried cowpea.  
 
Natural reseeding can occur, and disking in spring can 
stimulate the growth of buried seed (Ball et al., 2007). 
The plant will not tolerate fire (FAO, 2012). 

Pests and Potential Problems 
Cowpea may be affected by fusarium wilt (Fusarium 
oxysporum), bacterial canker, southern stem blight 
(Sclerotium spp.), cowpea mosaic virus, cercospora leaf 
spot, rust, and powdery mildew (Podosphaera spp.) 
(MSU, 2010). Insect damage will most often occur during 
the seedling stage and may be caused by Mexican bean 
beetles (Epilachna varivestis), bean leaf beetles 
(Cerotoma trifucata), cowpea curculios (Chalcodermus 
aeneus), grasshoppers, aphids, green stink bugs, lesser 
cornstalk borers, and weevils (when in storage)(TJAI, 
2010). 

Environmental Concerns 
Cowpea is not likely to persist outside cultivated fields. 

Seeds and Plant Production 
The seed matures in 90 to 140 days, and an acre can 
produce 1,400 lb (TJAI, 2010) to 2,700 lb of seed (Clark, 
2007). There are approximately 4,000 seeds/lb (Woodruff 
et al., 2010), and there are about 60 lb/bushel of grain 
(Murphy, 1993). There is a low percentage of hard seeds 

 

 

(FAO, 2012). Seed harvesting is recommended after the 
first frost has killed the crop (FAO, 2012). 
 
It is a self-pollinating plant, but wild annuals can easily be 
crossed with cultivated crops. 

 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin) 
There are more than 7,000 cultivars worldwide (Clark, 
2007). Roughly fifty varieties of commercial cowpea are 
used in the United States. Cultivars include ‘Chinese 
Red’, ‘Calhoun’, and ‘Red Ripper’. The cultivar ‘Iron 
Clay’ combines bushy and viny characteristics and is 
popular in the Southeast. Viny cultivars are more suitable 
for use as forage and cover crops, while bushy cultivars 
can be harvested with a combine as a dry seed. Viny 
cultivars are more susceptible to insect pests, diseases, 
and weed competition (Thorp et al., 2012). Environmental 
conditions have a large influence on the performance of 
the cultivar. 
 
References 
Allen, O.N., and E.K. Allen. 1981. The Leguminosae: a 
source book of characteristics, uses, and nodulation. 
The Univ. of Wisconsin Press, Madison, WI. 

Anyia, A.O., and H. Herzog. 2004. Water-use efficiency, 

leaf area and leaf gas exchange of cowpeas under 
mid-season drought. Eur. J. Agron. 20(4): 327–339. 
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S11
61030103000388 (accessed 6 Jun. 2012) 

Ball, D.M., C.S. Hoveland, and G.D. Lacefield. 2007. 
Southern forages: modern concepts for forage crop 
management. 4th ed. International Plant Nutrition 
Institute (IPNI), Norcross, GA. 

Clark, A. (ed.) 2007. Cowpeas: Vigna unguiculata. In: 

Managing cover crops profitably. 3rd ed. Sustainable 
Agriculture Research and Education, College Park, 
MD. p.125–129. http://www.sare.org/Learning-
Center/Books/Managing-Cover-Crops-Profitably-
3rd-Edition/Text-Version/Legume-Cover-
Crops/Cowpeas (accessed 6 Jun. 2012) 

 Cook, B.G., B.C. Pengelly, S.D. Brown, J.L. Donnelly, 
D.A. Eagles, M.A. Franco, J. Hanson, B.F. Mullen, 
I.J. Partridge, M. Peters, and R. Schultze-Kraft. 2005. 
Tropical forages: an interactive selection tool. Vigna 
unguiculata CSIRO, DPI&F(Qld), CIAT, and ILRI, 
Brisbane, Australia. 
http://www.tropicalforages.info/key/Forages/Media/
Html/Vigna_unguiculata.htm (accessed 6 Jun. 2012) 

 

Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). 2012. 
Grassland species index. Vigna unguiculata 

http://www.fao.org/ag/AGP/AGPC/doc/Gbase/data/p
f000090.htm (accessed 6 Jun. 2012) 

Mississippi State University (MSU). 2010. Mississippi 
forages: cowpea (Vigna unguiculata). Mississippi 
Agric. and For. Exp. Stn. 
http://msucares.com/crops/forages/legumes/warm/co
wpea.html (accessed 6 Jun. 2012) 

Murphy, W.J. 1993.Tables for weights and measurement: 

crops. Publication # G4020. Univ. of Missouri 
Extension.  
http://extension.missouri.edu/publications/DisplayPu
b.aspx?P=G4020 (accessed 6 Jun. 2012) 

Thorp, S., M. Davison, O. Frost, and M. Pickstock. (ed.) 

2012. New agriculturist: the highs and lows of 
cowpea IPM. Wren Media Ltd., Suffolk, UK. 
http://www.new-ag.info/99-5/focuson/focuson9.html 
(accessed 6 Jun. 2012) 

Thomas Jefferson Agricultural Institute (TJAI). 2010. 

Cowpea: a versatile legume for hot, dry conditions. 
Columbia, MO. 
http://www.jeffersoninstitute.org/pubs/cowpea.shtml 
(accessed 6 Jun. 2012) 

Woodruff, J.M., R.G. Durham, and D.W. Hancock. 2010. 

Forage establishment guidelines. The Univ. of 
Georgia College of Ag. and Env. Sciences. 
http://www.caes.uga.edu/commodities/fieldcrops/fora
ges/establishment.html (accessed 6 Jun. 2012) 

 

 

Prepared By: Christopher M. Sheahan; USDA-NRCS, 
Cape May Plant Materials Center, Cape May, New 
Jersey. 
 
Citation 
Sheahan, C.M. 2012. Plant guide for cowpea (Vigna 
unguiculata). USDA-Natural Resources Conservation 
Service, Cape May Plant Materials Center, Cape May, NJ. 

Published 06/2012 
Edited: 16jun2012 aym, 20jun2012 aj; 25jun2012plsp; 25jun2012ac 
For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov. 

PLANTS is not responsible for the content or availability 
of other Web sites. 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

 

